 
 
16 
 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 2  - AUDIT OF GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND 
VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ON GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND VIGILANCE 
DEPARTMENT OF RAILWA Y 
The General  Administration  at each Zonal  Railway  Head Quarter is headed by 
the one General Manager  who is overall in -charge of the zone. It functions  as a 
nodal centre for co -ordination  with various departments7 of Zonal Railway head  
quarter  and divisions  responsible for implementation  of policy  formulated by the 
Ministry  of Railways  and also  responsible for maintenance  of various assets  and 
operation  of trains  services across the zone including construction  department 
who is responsible for construction  of new  assets . It also co -ordinates with the 
Chairman , Railway Board  and Members  of the Railway Board , for various issues. 
On the other hand , it also maintains liaison  with the General Public , Members of 
Parliament  (MPs ), Members of legislative Assemblies (MLAs ) of the concerned 
states, members of Zonal Rai lway Users Consultative  Committee  (ZRUCC). 
Further, maintenance  of public  relation with print media , e-media  etc. is also the 
responsibility  of this General Administration under the GM . An overall 
management  of Arbitration  cases arising out of dispute with contractors  and 
allotment of officers’ rest  houses accom modation to officers at zonal head  
quarter , liaison with employee’s unions/trade unions and finalisation of APAR  of 
Gazetted  officers are also being done by this nodal office of General Manager .  
Each Division ’s General  Administration  is headed by the Divisional  Railway  
Manager  and assisted by Additional  Divisional Railway  Managers . Each  
Department ’s head  at divisions  responsible for maintenance  of assets  and 
operation  of trains  services, called Divisional Officers8 reports  to the DRM . It 
also maintains liaison  with the General Public , Members  of Parliament  (MPs ), 
Members of legislative Assemblies (MLAs ), members of Divisional Railway 
Users Consultative  Committee  (DRUCC), maintain public  relation with print 
media , e-media  etc. and Railway union at Divisional level. ADRM, being ex -
officio estate officer hears the cases of unauthorised occupation /e ncroachment 
of railway  premises/ residences etc .  
 
 
                                                           
7 Operating , Commercial , Stores , Accounts , Personnel  etc.   
8 Normally from JAG/SG grade of officers  
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
17 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  VIGILANCE  
It is the role of the ad ministration in any organisation  to set up systems which 
encourage integrity and transparency and come down heavily on corrupt 
practices.   Essentially, every officer and staff  is himself/herself a vigilance  officer 
and needs to ensure probity in the work  being done by him/her and the people 
who work  with him/her.   The Vigilance  organisation is an essential and integral 
part of Indian  Railways  and assists the department towards running  a clean and 
efficient administration. (Source - Para 101.3 of Indian Railway  vigilance Manual  
2018)  
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF GENERAL 
ADMINISTRATION  
The General  Administration  at each Zonal  Railway  Head Quarter  and production  
units  is headed by the General Manager   and report s to the Chairman & CEO , 
Railway Board  and Members  of the Railway Board  such as Member  (Traction  & 
Rolling  Stock)- M/TRS , Member Infr astructure - M/Infra,  Member Operations  & 
Business  Development - M/O&BD ,   Member Finance -MF  who are dealing the 
policy  etc. of their respective branch  (M.R O.O.No.  64 of 2020). The General 
Manager  of a zone is assisted by the Additional  General Manager,  Sr. Deputy  
General Manager, Secretary  to the GM , Deputy General Managers  and 
supplement  of support  staff.  Respective Departmental9 head  at zonal head  quarter  
headed by SAG/HAG10 Officers report to the General Manager. Similarly 
respective departmental  officers of divisions  report to the Divisional  Railway 
Managers.    
VIGILANCE  
Vigilance  Organization11 on Indian  Railways  is headed by Principal  Executive  
Director  (Vigilance) [earlier known as Adviser , Vigilance], who is the Chief  
Vigilance Officer, Ministry  of Railways , and reports  to Chairman , Railway  
Board. He is a link between the Ministry of Railways and CVC .  He is in the rank 
of Additional  Secretary , Government  of India . He is assisted by a team of Officers 
& staff  in the Vigilance Directorate  of Railway Board . 
At the level of Zonal  Railways , the Vigilance  Organization  is headed by th e 
Senior  Deputy  General  Manager  (SDGM ), who is also designated as the Chief  
Vigilance Officer of the Zonal Railway . In Production  Units  & Public  Sector  
                                                           
9Respective departments  at zonal level and Dvisional level are : Operations , Commercial , Stores , Finances , Safety , 
Security  etc. 
10 Sr Administrative  Grade /Higher Administrative Grade  
11 Para  103 of Indian  Railway  Vigilance  Manual  2018  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
18 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 Undertakings  attached to the Ministry  of Railways, the Vigilance Organization is 
headed by a Chief Vigilance Officer (although the CVC  refers to the CVOs as 
Vigilance Officers only). The CVO  reports  directly to the General Manager /Head 
of the Unit .  He is generally in the rank of Joint  Secretary  to the Government  of 
India .  He is assisted by Vigilance officers drawn from various disciplines  of 
Railway services – Chief Vigilance Officers (Senior Administrative  Grade ), Dy.  
Chief Vigilance Officers (Selection  Grade/Junior  Administrative Grade), 
Vigilance Officers (Senior Scale ) and Assistant  Vigilance Officers (Junior Scale)  
and inspectors,  watchers, office staff  etc.  The exact composition of Vigilance 
officials varies across Railways.  (Source - Para 103.1  and 103.2  of Indian  
Railway vigilance  Manual  2018)  
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1 General  Administration : 
3.1.1 At Railway  Board  level  
I) General  superintendence  
II) Framing of policy  / rules  and interpretation thereof  
3.1.2 At Zonal  Level  
I) General  Superintenden ce of Zone. Arranging Principal  Officers Meeting    
(POM ), Work  Review meeting, Safety  meetings.  
II) To maintain public  relation with general publi c and media  including print 
media  and e -media .  
III) To co -ordinate  with Zonal  Railway  Users Consultative  Committee  
(ZRUCC ), arranging and conducting meeting with them. Implementation 
or otherwise the suggestions etc.  of the committee .  
IV) Meeting  with union officials, Participation of railway  employee in 
Management  (PREM ).  
V) Management  of Arbitration  cases arising out of disputes with contractor 
over the zone.  
VI) Dealing with complaint  by MP, MLA and other complaint  cases.  
VII) Management  of Officers Rest  Houses Gazetted  Officers Pool 
Accommodation at Head Quarter  
VIII) Protocol services, dealing visit of high  dignitaries .  
IX) Implementatio n of Official language policy  – Hindi. Publishing Hindi 
books , training  to staff  and officers organising Hindi meeting – through 
Rajbhasha  Adhikari (Hindi Officers)  
X) Generation  and finalisation of APAR  of Gazetted  officers through 
SPARROW .  
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
19 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  3.1.3 At Division / Field level  
I) General  Superintendence  of Division . Arranging Branch  /Departmental  
Officers Meeting , Work  Review meeting, Safety  meetings.  
II) To maintain public  relation with general public  and media  including print 
media  and e -media  in Division  
III) To co -ordinate  with Divisional  Railway  Users Consultative  Committee  
(DRUCC ), arranging and conducting meeting with them. Implementation 
or otherwise the suggestions etc.  of the committee  
IV) Meeting  with union officials  
V) Dealing with complaint  by MP, MLA and other complaint  cases – 
normally with the help of Commercial  Department  (Sr. DCM ).  
VI) Implementation of Official language policy  – Hindi. Publishing Hindi 
books , training  to staff  and officers organising Hindi meeting – through 
Rajbhasha  Adhikari (Hindi Officers)  
Dealing with eviction cases of unauthorised occupation of railway  land/premises 
by general public  / railway  employee under Estate  Court  by ADRM.   
3.2 Vigilance  
3.2.1  At Railway  Board  level  
While it is diff icult to outline an exhaustive list of functions  & responsibilities of 
Vigilance  functionaries, as the sphere of Vigilance is ever -evolving, an indicative 
list is as under:  
I) Undertake prompt investigation of authenticated  complaints , with special  
emphasis on Presidential & PMO  references  etc., CVC -referred 
complaints , complaints  appearing in the media  and serious complaints , 
involving malafide intent, sent by members of the public . 
II) Carry out checks , with follow -up investigations, on serious cases of 
irregularities , based on s ource information.  
III) Ensure speedy processing of Vigilance  cases at all stages. Undertake 
regular review of these cases.  
IV) Ensure that charge sheets  are prepared accurately, without any loopholes, 
and relevant documents  are carefully sorted out and sent promptly to the 
Inquiry  Officer.  
V) Ensure prompt appointment  of the Presenting Officer  (PO) and the 
Inquiry  Officer (IO) for DAR  inquiries.   
VI) Ensure that DAR  inquiries are conducted expeditiously by Inquiry  
Officers, who are under the administrative control  of SDGMs.   
VII) Process the IO’s report properly and expeditiously for obtaining f inal 
orders of the Disciplinary Authority .  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
20 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 VIII) Ensure that the Central  Vigilance  Commission  (CVC ) is consulted at all 
relevant stages (details in Chapter II & VI), in an expedi tious manner.  
IX) Ensure prompt submission of returns  to CVC . 
X) Maintain close liaison  with CVC , CBI  and the Department  of Personnel  
& Training . 
XI) Take appropriate  and expeditious action  with regard to Court  cases.  
XII) Ensure that proper assistance is given to CBI  for investigation of cases.  
XIII) Develop a system  of collecting in telligence about malpractices being 
committed in the Organization .  
XIV)  Scrutinize reports  of Parliamentary  Committees, Audit  Reports , 
proceedings of both Houses of Parliament , news items in the media , 
annual  property  statements, etc. to obtain information about irregularities  
that pertain to the Organization . 
XV) Keep a close watch on the functioning & integrity of personnel in the 
Vigilance  department itself.   
XVI)  Undertake review of existing rules  & procedures, with a view to plug 
loopholes and suggest systemic improvements to curb cor ruption.  
XVII)  Maintain close surveillance on officials of doubtful  integrity, and those 
who are on the ‘Agreed’ and ‘Secret ’ lists.  
XVIII)  Arrange regular and surprise inspections  at sensitive work  units , which 
are susceptible to corruption.  
XIX)  Monitor adherence to aspects of Conduct Rules  relating to integrity.   
XX) Disseminate awareness about Vigilance , through Vigilance bulletins, 
seminars , worksh ops, lectures, etc.   
XXI)  Undertake regular inspection  of the Vigilance  branch.   
(Source - Para 104 of the Railway  Vigilance  Manual -2018)  
3.2.2  At Zonal  Level  
The duties and functions  mentioned above for the CVO  of the Ministry  of 
Railways  would also ipso facto be applicable to the CVOs of Zonal  Railways to 
the extent they are concerned with these functions.  
In addition to the functions  stated a bove,  
I) The CVOs will scrutiniz 1e of VOs/ VIs is not normally exceeded and no 
extensions are granted without prior specific approval  of the Authority . 
II) To ensure that the Dy.  CVOs/ VOs etc, including the CVO  himself do not 
sit on any Tender  Committee  or Selection  Committees as per rules  in 
force.  
III) Periodical  Lectures and talks with officers DRMs/HODs, and Staff  in 
Zonal  Training  School to spread Vigilance  education.   
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
21 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  (Source - Para 105 of the Railway  Vigilance  Manual -2018)  
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
General  Administration  
Level of unit  Main activity  Allied/ sub  activity  
Appex(GM ) General  
Superintendence  of 
Zone.  1. Principal  Officers Meeting  
(POM ),  
2. Work  review meeting  
3. Safety  meeting  
Field Unit  
(Division ) General  
Superintendence  of 
Division .  1. Branch  / Departmental  Officers 
meeting  
2. Work  review meeting  
3. Safety meeting  
Apex & 
Field units  
(Divisions ) Public  relation  1. With General  public  
2. With Print media  
3. With Electronic  medi a 
Apex & 
Field units  
(Divisions)  To co -ordinate  with 
Zonal  Railway  Users 
Consultative 
Committee(ZRUCC ), 
Divisional  Railway 
users cons ultative  
committee  (DRUCC )  
 1. Meeting with  Zonal  Railway  
Users Consultative 
Committee (ZRUCC ) 
2. Meeting with Divisional  Railw ay 
Users Consultative committee  
(DRUCC )  
3. Minutes  of meeting  
4. Implementation of 
recommendations / suggestions  
 Apex   & 
Field units  
(Divisions ) Meeting  with union 
officials  1. Minutes  of meetings   
2. Follow up action  
Apex  & 
Field units  
(Divisions ) Implementation of 
Official language policy  
– Hindi.  1. Arranging Hindi meetings  
2. Publishing Hindi books  and 
Magazine  
3. Training  to staff  and officers  
Apex   units  
(GM)   IT Applications  1.   SPARROW – Smart  Performance  
Appraisal Report  Recording 
online  Window  
Apex  Unit 
(GM ) Management  of 
Arbitration  cases 
arising out of disputes 
with contractor over 
the zone.  1. Maintenance  list of Arbitration  
cases, pending  cases disposed off.  
2. Nomination  of Arbitrators  
3. Supervis ing the implementation  
of Arbitration  award  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
22 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 4. Arranging payment of fees to 
Arbitrators  
5. Facil itating meetings of 
Arbitrators  
Field unit  
(ADRM)  
 Dealing with eviction 
cases of unauthorised 
occupation of railway  
land/premises by 
general public  / 
railway  employee 
under Estate  Court  by 
ADRM.  1. Maintenance  list of Arbitration  
cases, pending  cases disposed off.  
2. Arranging hearing of cases  
3. Implementation of eviction 
proceedings  
Vigilance  
RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ) Investigation  of 
authenticated 
complaints . 1. Undertake prompt investigation 
of authenticated complaints , with 
special  emphasis on Presidential 
& PMO  references  etc., CVC -
referred complaints , complaints  
appearing in the media  and 
serious complaints , involving 
malafide intent, sent by members 
of the public . 
RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ) Serious cases of 
irregularities , based on 
source information  1. Carry out checks , with follow -up 
investigations, on serious cases of 
irregularities , based on sour ce 
information.  
RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ)  Vigilance  cases  
 1. Ensure speedy processing of 
vigilance  cases at all stages  
2. Undertaking of regular review of 
those cases  
RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ) Follow up of cases 
registered  
 1. Ensure that charge sheets  are 
prepared accurately, without any 
loopholes,  
2. Relevant documents  are carefully 
sorted out and sent promptly to 
the Inquiry  Officer.  
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
23 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ) Consultation with 
Central  Vigilance  
Commission  (CVC ) 1. Ensuring that the Central  
Vigilance  Commission  (CVC ) is 
consulted at all relevant stages (as 
per details in Chapter II & VI of 
Indian  Railway  Vigilance 
Manual ), in an expeditious 
manner.  
RB, Apex  
(Zonal  HQ) Obtaining information 
about irregularities  
pertain to the 
Organization . 1. Scrutinizing the reports  of 
Parliamentary  Committees,  
2. Audit  Reports ,  
3. proceedings of both Houses of 
Parliament , 
4. news items in the media ,  
5. annual  property  statements, etc.  
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS  
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the General  
Administration  and Vigilance  Department : 
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) When last Audited  viz. Audited last one year/three year/five year/more 
than five year/never audited . 
III) Result  of last Audit . 
IV) Audit  perception based on MCDO /PCDO  of the department, Minutes  of 
meetings  
V) Audit  perception based on Newspaper  publication, Complaint s lodged 
etc.  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 
AND VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  embarked on a speed  work  of switching over to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and have implemented various IT Applications  in the 
last few years . General  Administration  has no major  IT applications . However, 
following IT applications  are in use in the Department :  
I) Officers’ Rest  House  Booking /confirmation  
II) MCDO  in Railway  Board  Site 
III) APAR  in Railway  Board  Site 
Vigilance  Department  is using application  software  named “Indian  Railways  
Integrated  Vigilance Information  System  (IRVINS).    
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
24 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS -CHECK LIST  
7.1 Arbitration  Awards  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with para 10 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.2 Manpower  Management  
Manpower  planning  is a process with the aim to have the right number of staff  at 
right places with right type of skills at right times to enable the organisation  to 
achieve its short term and long term goals.  
Manpower  plannin g means establishment of job specifications  or qualitative 
requirements of jobs  to determine the number of people required and to find 
supply  source.  
Manpower  recruitment  is related to matching the personal qualities of employees  
with the job requirements.  
During Audit , it should be seen –  
I) Whether the assessment  and recruitment  of man-power  are realistic  
II) Whether the available manpower  is effectively utilized.  
III) Whether adequate training  is imparted . 
IV) Whether the Railway  Board  instructions  regarding rightsizing of 
manpower  are complied with . 
V) The impact  on manpower  due to Outsourcing  of activities . 
VI) The impact  of implementation  of incentive  scheme, if any.  
VII) Whether contract  labour  are engaged on need basis . 
VIII) Operation of excess posts , if any, over and above the sanctioned  strength  
IX) Crea tion and operation  of work  charged posts  (Gaz. & NG) based on the 
sanctioned  cost of a particular project and their repatriation on completion  
of the project.  
7.3  List of Items To Be Seen During Inspection . 
7.3.1  General  Administration  
General  Manager ’s Office   
I) Attendanc e Register  and Casual  Leave  Registers with salary bills . 
II) Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
III) Registers of sanctions  - General  review may be made and in case of 
any doubtful  item the same may be verified from the concerned 
Department ’s file  from which i t was generated. (Cf Para4.8 of 
Compliance  Auditing  Guideline)  
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
25 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  IV) Salary  Bill of Non  Gazetted  Officers including: TA  Bill with journals , 
OT Bills , Medical  attendance  Bills, Subsistence Allowance  bills and 
other allowances  paid. 
V) Reimbursement  of tuition  fees bills . 
VI) Service  Records  and Leave  Account  of Non  Gazetted  staff including  
VII) Check  of fixation  of Pay . 
VIII) Cadre  Register  – General  review with  sanctioned  strength  and actual 
men in position . 
IX) Office  order registers  – Handing  over and taking over note of Gazetted  
officers posted / transferred.  
X) Log Book of Departmental  vehicle  to see the actual use . 
XI) Review of records / files  in connection with hiring of vehicle , bills  
thereof and utilisation of such vehicle .  
XII) Accounts  of Pass  and PTOs (If any).  
XIII) Dead  stock  Register  of office including Computer  System . Disposal  
of old f urniture  / dead  stock  / computer  system  may also be seen  
XIV)  Stamp  and stationery accounts .  
XV) Accounts  of cash  Imprest  including the imprest  operated through bank  
account  and check book. Expenditure  made on Hospitality  Account . 
XVI)  Misc . Account  not included in above items .  
XVII)  Confidential  reports  – MCDO  / PCDO  to higher authority .  
XVIII)  Minutes  of meeting with Principal  Officers (P OM), Work  Review 
Meeting , Safety  Review Meeting.  
XIX)  Minutes  of meeting with MP/MLA, ZR UCC – implementation  issues 
may be examined. Follow up action  on the meetings may be seen . 
XX) Minutes  of meeting with union officials.  
XXI)  Review of Court  Cases / Arbitration  Cases.  
XXII)  Review of Budget  grant  and actual expenditure . 
XXIII)  Review of GM ’s Sanctions  of Cash  Award.  
XXIV)  Inspection  note of General  Manager  and follow up  action  thereon  
XXV)  Review of issues with State  Government . 
XXVI)  Allotment /Vacant position of Gazetted  Officers’ Accommodation 
including transit accommodation . 
XXVII)  Allotment  of Officers’ Rest  Houses . 
XXVIII)  Procurement  of furniture /office equipment  through Stores  
Department  and utilisation thereof.  
XXIX)  Budget  allotment and expenditure  in Hindi Section .  
XXX)  Expenditure  made on purchase  and publication of Hindi Books  and 
Magazines and their utilisation.  
XXXI)  Expenditure  incurred on Hindi Meetings and ex penditure  on training  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
26 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 of officers and staff . 
XXXII)  Check  submission of Annual  Certificate  on Utilization of Secret  
Service  Fund  (duly signed by GM ) to Zonal  Accounts  Office . 
7.3.2  Divisional  Railway  Manager ’s Office  
I) Attendance  Regi ster and Casual  Leave  Registers with salary bills . 
II) Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
III) Registers o f sanctions  - General  review may be made and in case of 
any doubtful  item the same may be verified from the concerned 
Department ’s file  from which it was generated. (Cf 4.8 of Compliance  
Auditing  Guideline)  
IV) Salary  Bill of Non Gazetted  Officers including:  (Cf 4.8 of Compliance  
Auditing  Guideline ) 
a) TA Bill with journals , OT Bills , Medical  attendance  Bills, 
Subsistence Allowance  bills,    
b) and other allowances  paid 
V) Reimbursement  of tuition  fees bills . 
VI) Service  Records  and Leave  Account  of Non  Gazetted  staff including  
VII) Check  of fixation  of Pay . 
VIII) Cadre  Register  – General  review with sanctioned  strength  and actual 
men in position.   
IX) Office  order registers  – Handing  over and taking over note of Gazetted  
officers posted / transferred.  
X) Log Book of Departmental  vehicle  to see the actual use . 
XI) Review of records / files  in connection with hiring of vehicle , bills  
thereof and utilisation of such vehicle .  
XII) Accounts  of Pass  and PTOs (if any) . 
XIII) Dead  stock  Register  of office including Computer  System . Disposal  
of old furniture  / dead  stock  / computer  system  may also be seen  
XIV)  Stamp  and stationery accounts .  
XV) Accounts  of cash  Imprest  including the imprest  operated through bank  
account  and check book. Expenditure  made on Hospitality  Account . 
XVI)  Misc . Acco unt not included in above items.  
XVII)  Confidential  reports  – MCDO  / PCDO  to higher authority .  
XVIII)  Review of field Inspection  note of GM  and DRM  and follow up  action  
thereon . 
XIX)  Minutes  of meeting with Branch  Officers, Work  Review Meeting , 
Safety  Review Meeting.  
XX) Minutes  of meeting with MP/MLA, DURCC – implementation  issues 
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
27 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  may be examined. Follow up action  on the meetings may be seen . 
XXI)  Minutes  of meeting with union officials.  
XXII)  Review of Budget  grant  and actual expenditure . 
XXIII)  Review of DRM ’s Sanctions  of Cash  Award.  
XXIV)  Review of issues with State  Government , local  bodies  
XXV)  Allotment  / vacant position of Gazetted  Officers’ Accommodation 
including transit accommodation (if any) . 
XXVI)  Allotment  of Officers’ Rest  Houses (if any) . 
XXVII)  Procurement  of furniture /office equipment  through Store s 
Department  and utilisation thereof.  
XXVIII)  Budget  allotment and expenditure  in Hindi Section .  
XXIX)  Expenditure  made on purchase  and publication  of Hindi Books  and 
Magazines and their utilisation.  
XXX)  Expenditure  incurred on Hindi Meetings and expenditure  on training  
of officers and staff . 
7.3.3  Vigilance  Department12 
I) Attendance  Register  and Casual  Leave  Registers with salary bills . 
II) Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
III) Salary  Bill of Non  Gazetted  Officers including: TA  Bill with journals , 
OT Bills , Medical  attendance  Bills, Subsistence Allowance  bills and 
other allowances  paid. (Cf 4.8 of  Compliance  Auditing  Guideline s) 
IV) Reimbursement  of tuition  fees bills . 
V) Service  Records  and Leave  Account  of Non  Gazetted  staff including  
VI) Check  of fixation  of Pay . 
VII) Cadre  Register  – General  review with sanctioned  strength  and actual 
men in position . 
VIII) Creation  of posts  in Vigilance  Department . 
IX) Review of work -charged posts  created for the department and 
justification  thereof. Currency may be checked.  
X) Office  order registers  – Handing  over and taking over note of Gazetted  
officers posted / transferred.  
XI) Log Book of Departmental  vehicle  to see the actual use . 
XII) Review of records / files  in connection with hiring of vehicle , bills  
thereof and utilisation of such vehicle .  
XIII) Accounts  of Pass  and PTOs (if any) and Passes  and PTOs issued to 
non Railway  Department  (if any) . 
XIV)  Dead  stock  Register  of office including Computer  System . Disposal  
                                                           
12Check  list prepared on the basis of past ex perience and Para  104 and 105 of Indian  Railway  Vigilance  Manual  
2018 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
28 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 of old furniture  / dead  stock  / computer  system  may also be seen . 
XV) Stamp  and stationery accounts .  
XVI)  Accounts  of cash  Imprest  including the imprest  operated through bank  
account  and cheque  book.  
XVII)  Misc . Acco unt not included in above items.  
XVIII)  Confidential  reports  – MCDO  / PCDO  to higher authority .  
XIX)  Review of Bud get grant  and actual expenditure . 
XX) Procurement  of furniture  / office equipment  through Stores  
Department  and utilisati on thereof.  
XXI)  Expenditure  made on Vigilance  Awareness & Bulletin publication.  
XXII)  Monthly  / Quarterly reports  to Central  Vigilance  Commission .  
XXIII)  Performance  of the Railway  vigilance  organisation  / MCDO  analysis   
XXIV)  Quarterly DOP&T Returns (Rotation of staff ), RRB /RRC  etc. 
XXV)  Quarterly review meeting with divisions .  
XXVI)  Details of vigilance  cases13 pending  including  Presidential & PMO  
references , CVC  Referred complaints , Complaints  appearing in media  
and serious complaints  involving malafide intent, sent by member of 
public - reasons for pendency may be anal ysed from the available 
record s. 
XXVII)  Details of cases disposed off and action  taken thereon .  
XXVIII)  No of preventive  checks  carried out and outcome thereon. Minimum 
number prescribed  in this regard is 40 preventive checks  per year per 
Vigilance  Inspector . Some of the preventive checks should also be 
carried out by the Dy.CVOs/ VOs/ AVOs personally . {Para  105 (iv) 
of IR Vigilance Manual } 
XXIX)  No. Of Checks carried out on source information on serious cases of 
irregularities  and outcome of the checks . {Para  104 (ii) of IR  
Vigilance  Manual } 
XXX)  What is the machinery available to keep a close watch on the 
functioning & integrity of personnel in the Vigilance  Department  
itself and how it works .  
XXXI)  What is the machinery available to maintain close surveillance on 
officials of doubtful  integrity, and those who are on the “Agreed” and 
“Secret ” lists.  
XXXII)  No of surprise inspection  “at sensitive work  units”, which susceptible 
to corruption and results thereof – whether system  exists on the issue .  
XXXIII)  The must carry out inspection  of his vigilan ce branch at least once 
year – whether any records exist to show that the same is being done.  
                                                           
13Item 26 to 37 are based IR Vigilance  Manual  2018 , Para  104 and 105  
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
29 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  XXXIV)  Records  / minutes  of Periodical  meetings held with the Dy.CVOs/ 
VOs with a view to discussin g pendency and expediting disposals.  
XXXV)  Records  / minutes  of Periodical  meetings held with SPs/ SPE/ CBI  
concerned.  
XXXVI)  Review of records regarding the tenure of VOs/ Vis which should not 
normally exc eed and no extensions are granted without prior specific 
approval  of the Authority . 
XXXVII)  Whether Periodical  Lectures and talks held with officers 
DRMs/HODs, and Staff  in Zonal  Training  School to spread Vigilance  
education.   Records  in this regard may be checked.  
(Source : Para 104 & 105 of  IR Vigilance  Manual -2018  in respect 
of item no. 26 to 37 mentioned above ) 
  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
 
30 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 List of Abbreviations  
 
I) ADRM - Additional  Divisional  Railway  Manager  
II) APAR - Annual  Performance  Appraisal  Report  
III) CBI- Central  Bureau  of Investigation  
IV) CPO - Chief  Personnel  Officer  
V) CVC - Chief  Vigilance  Commissioner  
VI) CVO - Chief  Vigilance  Officer  
VII) DAR - Discipline and Appeal  Rules  
VIII) DCM - Divisional  Commercial  Manager  
IX) DOPT - Department  of Personnel  and Training  
X) DRM - Divisional  Railway  Manager  
XI) DRUCC - Divisional  Railway  Users Consultative  Committee  
XII) GM- General  Manager  
XIII) IRVINS - Indian  Railway  Integrated  Vigilance  Information  System  
XIV)  IO- Enquiry  Officer  
XV) MCDO - Monthly  Demi -official letter  
XVI)  MLA - Member  of legislative assembly  
XVII)  MP- Member  of Parliament  
XVIII)  PCDO - Periodical  Confidential  Demi Official  
XIX)  PO- Presenting Officer  
XX) POM - Principal  Officer Meeting  
XXI)  PREM - Participation of railway  employee in       Management  
XXII)  PTO - Privilege  Ticket Order  
XXIII)  RRB - Railway  Recruitment  Board  
XXIV)  RRC - Railway  Recruitment  Cell 
XXV)  SDGM - Senior  Deputy  General  Manager  
XXVI)  SPARROW - Smart Performance  Appraisal  Report  Recording onlin e 
Window  
XXVII)  ZRUCC - Zonal  Railway  Users Consultative  Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 – Audit of Geneal Administration and Vigilance Department  
 
31 
For internal use of IA&AD  
    

 
 
32 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER 3 - AUDIT OF ACCO UNTS DEPARTMENT  
1.  BRIEF ABOUT THE ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT  
In Indian  Railways , the accounting and auditing  was earlier done by the 
Accountant General . It was increasingly felt that the Ra ilway  Finances  should be 
separated from the General Finances. The most important land  mark in the history 
of the financial  administration on Railways  in India  was the appointment  of the 
Financial  Commissioner  for Railways in April, 1923, as part of the scheme of re -
organization  of the Railway Board  as re commended by the Acworth Committee  
(1921). The declared object of this appointment was to secure, firstly, economy  
in the expenditure  of public  moneys, and secondly, the coordination  of financial  
policy  of IR  with the general financial  policy of the Government  of India. This 
was followed by the Separation Convention  of 1924 by which Railway Finances 
were separated from the General Finances of the Government of India. As 
Railway Finances have been separated from the General Finances of Union  
Government, a separate budget  is presented for the Ra ilways. The financial  
relationship between the Union Government and the Railways is governed by the 
recommendations  made from time  to time  by the Railway Convention 
Committee.  
In September  2016, the Government  announced the merger  of the Railway  and 
Union  Budgets  and the first common Budget  was presented on February 1, 2017.  
The salient features  of the merger  are as follows:  
I) Ministry  of Railways  will continue to function as a departmentally run  
commercial  undertaking;  
II) Railways  will hav e a separate Statement of Budget  Estimates  and 
Demand  for Grants ; 
III) A single Appropriation  Bill, including the estimates  of Railways , will be 
prepared and presented by Ministry  of Finance  to Parliament  and all 
legislative work  connected therewith will be handled by Ministry of 
Finance;  
IV) Railways  will be exempted from payment of dividend  to General  
Revenues  and its Capital -at-charge would stand wiped off;  
V) The Finance  Ministry  will provide Gross Budgetary  Support to Ministry 
of Railways  towards meeting part of its capital  expenditure ; 
VI) Railways  may continue to raise resources  from the market through 
Extra-Budgetary  Resources as at present to finance its capital  
expenditure ; 
VII) A unified budget  will help to present a holistic  picture of the 
Government ’s financial  position;  
VIII) The merger  would facilitate  multimodal transport  planning  between 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
33 
For internal use of IA&AD  highways, railways and inland waterways; and  
IX) It will allow the Ministr y of Finance  greater elbow -room at the time  of 
mid-year review for better allocation  of resources , etc.  
2. ORGANIZATIONAL HIERARCHY  OF ACCOUNTS 
DEPARTMENT IN IR   
(including Directorates  in Railway  Board ) 
The Member  (Finance ) is the professional head  of the Railway ’s financial  
organization  and represents the Government  of India , Ministry  of Finance on the 
Railway Board . The Member (Finance) is assisted by Additional  Member 
(Finance), Additional Member (Budget ), Principal  Executive  Director  
(Accounts ) and Principal Executive Director (Finance). The Executive Directors  
dealing with Accounts matters, Accounting reforms, Finance, Finance (Budget), 
Finance (Commercial , Establishment ), Pay  Commission , Statistics  and 
Econom ics, etc. report to the respective Additional Members /Principal Executive 
Directors.  
At the Zonal  Headquarters level, Principal  Financial  Advisor  is the head  of 
Accounts  wing assisted by FA&CAOs /General , WST and Construction . Dy 
FA&CAOs  report to their respective FA&CAOs. The various functionalities in 
these wings are carried  out by Sr. AFA /AFAs  who report to their respective Dy.  
FA&CAOs. They are located either in headquarters  office or attached offices to 
the divisions , workshops , stores  and construction  units  under the zones.  
At the Divisional  level, Sr. Divisional Finance  Manager  is the head  of Accounts  
wing assisted by Divisional Finance Managers  and Asst.  Divisional Finance 
Managers.  
The size of organizational structure of Accounts  Department  varies depending on 
nature and volume of  work . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
34 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.1 At Ministry  Level:  
 
2.2 At Zonal  Level:  
 
2.3 At Field Level:  
 

Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
35 
For internal use of IA&AD  3. STRUCTURE OF RAILWAY ACCOUNTS  
3.1 Basis of Accounting  
The Railways  in India  are as much a Government  Concern as a Commercial  
enterprise . The Government Accounts  are kept purely on Cash  basis while the 
Accounts of Railways are kept on liability or accrual  basis. Unlike Government 
Accounts which record expenditure  only when actually disbursed or receipts only 
when actually realised, the railway accounts maintained on a Commercial basis 
record the expenditure incurred or earnings  accrued in a month irrespective 
whether they have actually been paid or realised.  
Accounts  heads operated for the purpose of maintaining a link between 
Commercial  Accounts of the Railway  and the G overnment  Accounts are (i) 
Demands Payable , (ii) Labour , (iii) Traffic  Accounts and (iv) Demands 
Recoverable . These are Suspense  heads.  
Demands Payable  On Expenditure side, the revenue liabilities of the Railway  
for a month, which are not payable within the same month are brought to the 
account as Working expenses for the month by taking contra  credit  to this 
Suspense  head. When the Railway’s liabilities are actually discharged by the 
payments this suspense  head is debited with the amount of payment so made. The 
balance is outstanding liab ility. It will always be a credit balance.  
Labour . The operation of this suspense  head is similar to “Demands Payable ”. 
The  value of the labour  employed in the Mechanical  and other departmental 
shops  must necessarily be charged to the works concerned in the month in which 
the labour was performed. The total value of the labour employed in the shops 
during the month will, therefore be credited to a Sub h ead Workshop Suspense  
Account “Labour”. The balance under this head will consequently represent 
liabilities account of Labour Pay sheets charged, but not cleared.  
Traffic  Account . This account serves the same purpose for ea rnings  as Demands 
Payable  does for expenses. This head is debited with all the earnings for 
realisation of which a Railway  Administration is responsible, irrespective of 
whether the earnings relate t o its own traffic  or to traffic  interchanged  with other 
Railways  and credited with realisation of all such earnings. The balance in this 
account thus represents unrealised  earnings either at the stations  or in the 
Accounts  Office. It will always be a debit  balance.  
Demands Recoverable . The amounts recoverable  relating to traf fic transactions 
of the Railways  are already included in the Traffic  Suspense  and hence exhibited 
in the financial  Accounts  of the Railways whether realise d or not. Demands 
Recoverable is operated in respect of the transactions namely, Rent and Lease of 
Railway  Land  and Buildings, Interest and Maintenance  charges on Sidings  which 
are to be bill ed by DRM’s office and Commercial  department for watching 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
36 
For internal use of IA&AD  realisation. In other words, these transactions do not originate at stations . It will 
always have debit  balance representing the amount yet to be re alised.  
The accounts of the Railways  maintained in accordance with the requirements of 
Government  Accounts  is termed as Finance  Accounts and the accounts of the 
Railways maintained in acc ordance with the requirements of Commercial  
Accounts is termed as Capital  and Revenue  Accounts.  
The Railway  Accounts  are maintained separately for Revenue  and Capital  
purposes and divided into three parts. They are:  
 Consolidated  Fund  of India , 
 Contingency  Fund  of India , 
 Public  Accounts  
The format of keeping of Railway  Accounts  under Major / Sub Major  /Minor  / 
Sub heads / Detailed heads  is laid down in In dian Railway Accounts Code Part I. 
The Railway Accounts are maintained separately for Revenue  and Capital  heads.  
The detailed classification  of expenditure /earnings  are prescribed in Indian 
Railway  Finance  Code Vol. II. 
3.2 Principle of Allocation  
Expenditure of Railways  is financed through: (i) its internal  resources  (freight 
and passenger revenue and leasing  of Railway  land) (ii) budgetary  support  from 
Central Government , and (iii) extra -budgetary  resources (primarily borrowings 
but also includes institutional financing, public -private  partnerships, and foreign 
direct investment).  
Railways ’ working expenses (salaries, staff amenities, pension, as set 
maintenance) are met through its internal  resources .  Capital  expenditure  (such 
as procurement  of wagons, station redevelopment) is financed through extra -
budget ary resources, the budgetary support  from the central government, and 
internal resources.  
3.3 The Fund  Accounting                                                             
The following funds are maintained by the Railway  in its books  of accounts  from 
where the different kinds of expenditures are financed. The management  of each 
of the funds maintained are as follows:  
The expenditure  is allocated to (i) 'Capital ', (ii) the Depreciation  Reserve  Fund  
(iii) the Development  Fund, (iv)  Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh , (v) EBR  (IF), 
(vi)  Capital ‘N’ – Nirbhaya  Fund.  
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
37 
For internal use of IA&AD  3.3.1  Capital    
The Finance  Ministry  will provide Gross Budgetary  Support to Ministry of 
Railway s towards meeting part of its capital  expenditure . The expenditure met 
from this head is mainly for acquisition  of new assets, construction of New lines , 
Gauge conve rsion , Doubling , Capital Suspense , etc. 
3.3.2  Depreciation  Reserve  Fund  
The receipts , which mainly consist of contributions  from Revenue  on the basis of 
the recommendations  of the Railway  Convention  Committee  and the interest  on 
the fund balances, will be cred ited to the fund. The payments from the fund, 
mainly on account  of replacement  and renewal  of assets  in accordance with the 
rules  of the fund, will be debi ted to the Fund . The balance  will be carried 
forwarded from year to year.  
3.3.3  Railway  Development  Fund  
The Fund  will be credited  with appropriation  from revenue surplus , interest  on 
Fund balances and loans  from General  Revenues . The withdrawals from the Fund 
will be in accordance w ith the rules  of the Fund, namely to meet the expenditure  
on providing amenities  for passengers  and other railway  users, labour  welfare  
works, un-remunerative  operating improvements etc. The balance  of the Fund 
will be carried forward from year to year.   
3.3.4   Railway  Pension  Fund  
Receipts  into the Fund  will consist of appropriation  from revenue/capital  account , 
transfer from contributory  Provident  Fund and interest  on Fund balances. All 
payments relating to pension and other retirement  benefits to pensionable 
employees  will be debited  to the accounts  of the Fund. The balance  of the Fund 
will be carr ied forward from year to year.  
3.3.5  Rashtriya  Rail Sanraksha  Kosh  (RRSK ) 
In the Budget  2017 -18, an exclusive fund called “Rashtriya  Rail San raksha  Kosh” 
(RRSK ) has been made with a corpus  of ₹1 lakh crore over a period of 5 years 
for giving a major boost to safety related works over Indian Railways  for 
improving safety of tracks, rolling stock and proliferation of other safety 
technologies .  
3.3.6  Extra  Budg etary Resources (IF)  
Indian Railways  in 2015 -16 decided to borrow funds from Institutional sources 
so as to ensure availability of funds for the next five years for completion of the 
projects critical to Railways for generation of revenues .  This source of funding 
was named as Extra  Budgetary Resources (Institutional Finance ) (EBR -IF).  The 
primary objective  was to utilize EBR (IF) funds for priority works under Plan 
Heads – New Li nes, Gauge Conversion, Doubling , Traffic  Facilities, Railway  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
38 
For internal use of IA&AD  Electrification and Signal & Telecommunication  etc. with a view to enhancing 
throughput on the congested corrid ors.  
3.3.7  Capital -N(Nirbhaya ) 
From 2016 -17, Plan head 6400 as (i) Nirbhaya  Funded Project with source of 
Finance  denoted as Capital  N  was introduced to denote dividend free budgetary  
allocation  from MOF for Capital Works . 
The Government  has set up a dedicated fund – Nirbhaya  Fund  – which can be 
utilized for projects specifically designed to improve the safety and security of 
women. It is a non -lapsable corpus  fund, being administered by Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry  of Finance . As per the guidelines i ssued by Ministry 
of Finance dt 25.03.2015, the Ministry of Women  and Child  Development  
(MWCD ) is the nodal Ministry to appraise/recommend proposals and schemes to 
be funded under Nirbhaya Fund. MWCD further has the responsibility to review 
and monitor  the progress of sanctioned schemes in conjunction with the line 
Ministries/Departments.  
The proposed projects under the Nirbhaya  Fund  should have the following 
features :  Direct impact on safety and security concerns of women  Optimum 
use of existing infrastructure   Innovative  use of technology  No duplication of 
existing government schemes/programmes .  
4.  ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ACCOUNTS 
DEPARTMENT  
Broadly, the roles and responsibilities of the Accounts  Department  are:   
I) to keep accounts  of Railways  in accordance wi th prescribed  rules  and 
code  books    
II) to check with reference to regulations  or orders of transactions affecting 
receipts  and expenditure  of Railways .   
III) prompt settlement of proper claims against the Indian  Railways .  
IV) tendering  advice to the administration whenever required or necessary in 
all matters involving railway  finance.  
V) compilation  of budgets  in consultation with other departments  and market 
economy  and also monitoring  budgetary  control  procedures from  time to 
time.   
VI) discharging other management  accounting functions  such as providing 
financial  data for management  reporting, assisting inventory  
management , participation in purchase / contracting decisions and surveys  
for major  schemes.   
VII) to see that there are no financial  irregularities  in transactions of Indian  
Railways . 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
39 
For internal use of IA&AD  5. CRITERIA FOR IDENTIFICATION OF APEX, AUDIT AND 
IMPLEMENTING UNITS AT MINISTRY LEVEL AND FIELD 
LEVEL (ZONAL RAILWAY/PRODUCTION UNITS/OTHER 
ORGANIZATION) OF ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT  
The criteria  for identification  of Apex , Audit  and Implementing  Units  for local  
audits are based on the Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines  2016  (Para  3.4 to 3.7)  
issued by C&AG  of India . Accordingly, the criteria  for identification  of Apex, 
Audit and Implementing Units at Ministry , Zonal  and Divisional  levels of 
Accounts  Department  are as follows : 
5.1 At Ministry  Level  
Apex  Unit  Member  (Finance ) 
Auditable  Units  AM (Finance ) AM (Budget ) PED  
(Accounts ) PED  
(Finance ) 
Implementing  Units  EDF,  
EDF -PPP, 
EDF (S),  
EDF -X-I, 
EDF -X-II EDF (B), 
ED/S&E, 
JDF( BC) DF(A), 
DF(CCA)  EDF(E), 
EDF(C), 
EDF(RM)  
5.2 At Zonal  Level  
Apex  Unit  Principal  Financial  Advisor  
Auditable   
Units  FA&CAO /G FA&CAO /T FA&CAO
/CN FA&CAO / 
Stores  FA&CAO / 
Workshop  
Implemen
ting Units  Dy. 
FA&CAO  
Sr. 
AFA /AFA  Dy. 
FA&CAO  
Sr. 
AFA /AFA  Dy. 
FA&CAO  
Sr. 
AFA /AFA  Dy. FA&CAO  
Sr. AFA /AFA  Dy. FA&CAO  
Sr. AFA /AFA  
5.3 At Field  Level  
Field Unit Name  Division  Construction  Workshop  Traffic  
Apex  Unit  Sr. DFM  Dy. FA&CAO  Dy. CAO (W& S) Dy. CAO 
(Traffic ) 
Auditable  Units  DFM  Sr. AFA  Sr. AFA  Sr. AFA  
Implementing  
Units  ADFMs  
Sr. SOs  AFA/  
Sr. SOs  AFA/  
Sr. SOs  AFA/  
Sr. SOs  
6. ACTIVITIES DONE BY THE ACCOUNT S DEPARTMENT  
The activities in Railway  Accounts  generally fall under the following areas:  
I) Administration  
II) Books  and Compilation  
III) Budget  
IV) Cash  and Pay 
V) Compensation  Claims  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
40 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Expenditure  Accounts  
VII) Establishment  Accounts  
VIII) Finance  and Planning  
IX) Fuel Accounts  
X) Inspection  of Executive  Offices  
XI) PF and Pension  
XII) Traffic  Accounts  
XIII) Stores  Accounts  
XIV)  Traffic  Costing  
XV) Workshop  Accounts  
7. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS WITH RESPECT TO THE 
ACTIVITIES OF ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT  
The assessment  of risk  is based on t he Para  3.9 of Compliance  Auditing  
Guidelines  2016 and Para 6.1.14 of MSO  (Audit ) issued by C&AG  of India . 
Accordingly, the risk parameters  of activities with respect to Apex , Audit and 
Implementing  Units  at Ministry , Zonal  level and divisional  levels of Acco unts 
Department  are as follows:  
Activities  of Accounts  Department  Risk  assessment  
Administration  Medium risk  
Books  and Compilation  Medium risk  
Budget  Medium risk  
Cash  and Pay  High  risk 
Compensation  Claims  High  risk 
Expenditure  Accounts  Very high  risk 
Establishment  Accounts  Very high  risk 
Finance  and Planning  Medium risk  
Fuel Accounts  High  risk 
Inspection  of Executive  Offices  Medium risk  
Pension  and PF   Very high  risk 
Traffic  Costing  Low risk  
Workshop  Accounts  High  risk 
Stores  Accounts  Very high  risk 
Traffic  Accounts  Very high  risk 
 
8. COMPUTERIZED APPLICATION SOFTWARE IN THE 
ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT  
Integrated  Payroll  and Accounting System  (IPAS ) is the widely used software  in 
the Accounts  Department . This software  itself has various modules  for accounts  
and it has provisions for integration with various existing software applications  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
41 
For internal use of IA&AD  in various departments  like FOIS , PRS , UTS , PMS , CMS , ARPAN , IREPS , 
IMMIS , for better and optimal utilization of this software. Each application  
software has provision for generation of managerial reports  including exception  
reports and these reports are vital for audit  of transactions performed under 
computerized  environment.  
9. COMPREHENSIVE CHECKLIST FOR CHECK OF V ARIOUS 
ACTIVITIES BEING PERFORMED BY THE ACCOUNTS 
DEPARTM ENT INCLUDING GENERAL CHECKLIST  
9.1       Audit  of Establishment  Accounts  
The preparation of salary bills  of employees  including assessment  and payment 
of various allowances  are processed in the payroll module  of IPAS . The rules  
framed  in the establishment manuals  and codes  and orders notified by the 
Railway  Board  with regard to pay  and allowances are built in the system . The 
preparation of salary bill takes into account  the calculation of various allowances 
such as National  Holiday  Allowance , Night  Duty  Allowance, Overtime  
Allowance, Kilometrage  Allowance, Travelling  Allowance, Children  Education  
Allowance, Bonus , DA  arrears , etc. It also takes into account  various deductions 
relating to e lectricity, rent  and income  tax. It generates various reports  such as 
allowances monitoring  report, exceptional salary report, DA Arrear statement, 
Court  recovery repo rt, rent report, Last Pay  certificate , etc.  
During audit  of establishment matters, the following aspects may be kept in mind 
to ensure correct payment of pay  including various allowances  and deductions 
made in the pay  bills. 
9.1.1    Cadre  check register  and Scale  check register  (Cadre module  in IPAS ) 
The Cadre  check register  with the sanctioned  strength  of gazetted  officers’ 
department wise and Scale  check register  with sanctioned  strength of non -
gazetted  employees ’ department wise are maintained in the Accounts  Office . In 
IPAS , these details are maintained in the Cadre module . It should be checked to 
see: 
I) Whether number of posts  operated and salary drawn have not exceeded 
the number of sanctioned  posts  for a department?  
II) In the case of temporary post  or work  charged posts , whether the period 
of currency  is posted in the register ?    
III) In case of non -extension of currency , whether provisional payment of pay  
and allowances  was authorized?  
IV) Whether provisional payment made was kept under objection book?  
V) Whether provisional payment was made beyond three months?  
VI) Whether pay  and allowances  of the work  charged posts  are correctly 
allocated to the work ? 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
42 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.2  Bio-data  
The Employee Ma ster database is the base for all employee related payments. 
The correctness of data in the master data is vital for genuine payment of salary 
and various other allowances  and to ensure that employees  included in the master 
table are bonafide employees . This validation can be done by comparing pay  roll 
details with the service  records.  
9.1.3   Pay bills 
I) The correctness of the payment of pay  and allowances  made to the 
employees  in each bill unit  has to be verified with the number of posts  
sanctioned  and recorded in the cadre  register  and scale check register . The 
Cadre  module  in IPAS  is interlinked  with Pay  module to have a control  
and prevent irregular payment of pay  and allowances.  
II) The employee shall begin to draw pay  and allowances  attached to the post  
with effect from the date of resuming duties of the post and shall cease to 
draw them when ceases to discharge those duties. The employee shall not 
be entitled to any pay  and allowances when absent from duty  without any 
authority . To validate the number of days that each employee is entitled 
for payment of pay  and allowances in a month , the leave  module  in 
interlinked  with the payroll  module in IPAS . The correctness of the 
payment of pay  and allowances may also be verified with the Absentee  
statement. The exception  reports  generated in the IPAS showing the 
difference in the gross amount of pay  allowances in the current  month  and 
the previous month  may be verified.  
9.1.4  Pay fixation , drawal  of increment  and postponement  of increment  
I) Whether pay  is drawn as per the pay  level for the post  to which the 
employee was appointed or promoted and it should be checked with the 
Office  Order and Service  Register ? 
II) In the case of drawal  of increment , it should be checked whether the 
employee has completed minimum of six months’ service .  
III) If the employee was o n recorded leave  on the date of increment , the higher 
pay should be fixed  from the date of reporting duty . 
IV) In case of promotion  to a higher post  whether t he employee has exercised 
the option for fixation  of pay  within three months from the date of 
assuming charge in the higher post.  
V) In the case of reduction in pay  or grade / post  / service  or postponement  
of increment  of an employee due to penalty  imposed by the authority , it 
should be checked that there was no delay in implementing the orders of 
the authority . It should also be verified whether on restoration, the period 
of reduction shall operate to postpone future increments and in such cases 
to what extent.  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
43 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.5  Pay/Stipend  to Trainees  
I) If the existing employees  are selected for a post  through LDCE / GDCE 
which requires mandatory training  for a specified period, the employee 
can opt either for existing pay  or stipend . The option exercised canno t be 
changed.  
II) Whether stipendiary  employee has been given usual pay  and allowances ? 
III) Whether new  trainees have been paid HRA  and transport  allowance?  
IV) Apprentices  are entitled to dearness  allowance at the rates as applicable 
on the stipend . 
9.1.6  Dearness  allowance  
Dearness  Allowance  is granted to  Railway  employees  to offset inflation and 
rising cost  of living and inflation. Basis for  DA calculation is All India  consumer 
price index . Government  sanctions  DA on the first of January and on the first of 
July every year if it is due as per the calculation. The rate  of dearness  allowance 
is 17% of the basic pay  with effect from 1st July 2019. It should be checked 
whether the r ate of DA admissible notified by the Railway Board  is implemented 
in IPAS .  
9.1.7   House  rent allowance  
I) Whether house  rent allowance is paid to the emplo yee according to the 
percentage  applicable to the city in which the employee is working (X 
category -26%; Y category -16%; and Z category -8%)?  
II) Whether house  rent allowance is paid to the employees  who are residing 
in government accommodation or sharing the accommodation with other 
employee?  
III) In case of transfer of employee from X category to Y category or Z 
category and Y category to Z category, whether the headquarters  is 
changed in the bio data of the employee in the IPAS  to ensure correct 
payment?  
IV) If the transferred employee occupied government quarters  in the old 
headquarters , whether HRA  is paid to the emplo yee for the period beyond 
a maximum  period of eight months?  
V) In case employees  are on leave  for a period beyond 180 days of LAP , 
whether HRA  is paid beyond 180 days?  
VI) For those employees  whom  Railway  Accommodation is specifically 
earmarked or whose occupation of quarters  is essential  for easy 
accessibility  during  emergencies  etc. will not be  paid HRA  even i f they 
surrender or do not occupy it.  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
44 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.8  Transport  allowance  
I) Whether Transport  Allowance  is paid to an employee according to his 
headquarters  city and pay  level?  
II) Whether Transport  allowance is not paid to an employee who is away 
from headquarters  on duty , training  or leave  during the entire calendar  
month ? 
III) Whether necessary change is made in the master data about the place of 
duty after transfer of employee to another city?  
9.1.9  Travelling  allowance  
I) Whether travelling  allowance paid to the officers / emp loyees  are as per 
the amount sanctioned  in the TA  journal ? 
II) Whether the arrival/ departure of train is correctly indicated as per the 
passenger  time table?  
III) Whethe r the rate  of Daily  Allowance  claimed is correct with reference to 
the pay  level of employee?  
IV) Whether calculation of number of days is correct with reference to the 
period of absence from headquarter s i.e., 30% for the period of absence 
upto 6 hours, 70% for period of over than 6 hours & up to 12 hours and 
100% for more than 12 hours?  
V) In the case of officer in the grade below JA grade, whether the TA  journal  
was countersigned by the Controlling  Officer?  
VI) If more than one journey was performed in a day, whether the daily 
allowance was restricted to one day?  
VII) If the road mileage  claimed, it should not exceed one -day daily  allowance.  
9.1.10  National  Holiday  Allowance  
I) Whether the employee actually worked on National  Holiday  with 
reference to his Muster  roll or atte ndance  register ? 
II) Whether NHA is paid according to the pay  level of the employee?  
III) Whether the employee was willfully allowed to work  on National  holiday 
even though he was on leav e on the days prior and after national holiday?  
IV) Whether necessary approval  of the competent  authority  was obtained for 
the employee to work  on national holiday?  
V) Whether NHA sta tement was prepared correctly by the unit  and submitted 
to bill section  and the details are correctly entered into NHA sub module  
in IPAS ? 
9.1.11  Night  duty  allowance  
I) Wheth er the employee had worked as per his rostered hours of duty ? 
II) Whether night  duty hours were calculated from 22.00 hours to 06.00 
hours?  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
45 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Whether weightage of 10 minutes  only for every hour of night  duty was 
taken for calculation of night duty allowance?  
IV) Whether night  duty allowance was allowed according to the category laid  
down in the Hours  of Employment  Regulations  (i.e. Continuous , 
Intensive , Essentially Intermittent or Excluded), pay  slab of the employee 
and at the rate  prescribed  by the Railway  Board  from time  to time ? 
9.1.12  Risk  Allowance  
I) Whether the allowance was paid according to the pay  level?  
II) Whether the trackman actually worked in the track  related duty ? 
III) In case if the track  man is engaged as gate  keeper, he is eligible for special  
LC gate  allowance for gate  keeping duty  as well.  
IV) In case the track  man is engaged in other than track  related duty  for a full 
calendar  month , he is not eligible for this allowance.  
V) The employee is not eligible for this allowance if he is  on leave  for a full 
calendar  month . 
9.1.13  Breakdown  allowance  
I) Whether the break down allowance was allowed to the employee 
nominated for break duties as per Office  Order?  
II) In ca se the nominated employee was transferred to a place where there is 
no Accident  Relief  Train  (ART ) available, whether Break down  
Allowance  was allowed?  
III) Whether b reak down staff  nomination  is revised periodically and advised 
to bill section ? 
9.1.14  Running  allowance  
I) Whether the Running  staff (Loco  Pilots , Guards  and Loco Inspectors ) had 
actually performed running  duty on particular day as per their rostered 
hours of duty as in the Crew  Link as approved  by the competent  authority ? 
II) Whether minimum kilometres were allowed for running  staff who worked 
in passenger  trains , ballast trains  and shunti ng operations  as prescribed  by 
Railway  Board ? 
III) Whether Running  Allowance  was paid to non -running  duties instead of  
Allowance in lieu of kilometrage (ALK)?                                                  
IV) Whether the kilometre as recorded in the CTR was entered in the CMS ? 
V) Whether Crew  Management  System  integra ted into IPAS . If not, whether 
the data was correctly fed into running  allowance sub module  of IPAS?  
VI) Whether Running  allowance was calculated at the rate  applicable  to the 
posts  at the time  of working on the trains ? 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
46 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.15  Special  Allowance  for Gate  keepers  
I) As there is no gate  keeper designation at present, whether  this allowance 
was paid to the   nominated trackman only?  
II) Whether the special  allowance was allowed to the track  man who was 
deputed back to track  related duties?  
9.1.16  Personal  Pay for pa ssing Hindi Examinations  
I) Whether one increment  in the form of personal pay  as incentive  to those 
who passed Hindi Pragya exam was allowed for 12 months only?  
II) Whether the next increment  was sanctioned  at the rate  applicable 
immediately after passing the prescribed  examination?  
9.1.17  Conveyance  Allowance  to Doctors    
I) Whe ther the allowance was paid to the doctors who maintained their own 
vehicle  at the rate  applicable?  
II) Whether the doctors furnish monthly  a certificate  of minimum 20 
domiciliary visits in a mon th during non -working hours?  
III) Whether this allowance was paid during leave  for a full calendar  month ? 
9.1.18  Non Practising  Allowance  to Doctors   
I) Whether non practising allowance was paid in excess of 25% of pay ? 
II) Whether non practising allowance and pay  had exceeded Rs. 2,37,500/ - 
p.m.? 
9.1.19  Annual  Allowance  to Doctors  
Whether annual  allowance was paid only to those doctors who acquired post  
graduate  degree and not for Post Graduate diploma holders?  
9.1.20  Ration  Money Allowance   
I) Whether  ration  money allowance was paid during LAP  in excess of 120 
days?  
II) Whether ration  money allowance was paid during other kinds of leave  
such as commuted  leave , child  care leave , LHAP  etc.? 
9.1.21  Uniform  Allowance  
I) Whether lump  sum dress allowance was paid at the prescribed  rate to each 
cadre  viz., Nurse, Station  Master , RPF  officers and staff , safety  category 
staff of various departments ? 
II) Whether washing  allowance was paid to those uniformed employees  in 
addition to lump  sum amount?  
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
47 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.22  Over  time  Allowance   
I) Whether the over time  is calculated based on the  category of staff  as per 
HOER ? 
II) Whether outstation rest  has been excluded from calculation of Overtime  
allowance?  
III) Whether Overtime  allowance for first one hour is paid at one and hal f time  
only?  
9.1.23  Extra  Work  Allowance  (EWA)  
Extra  work  allowance is payable at two percent of the basic pay  per month  to 
non-gazetted  employees  for a maximum  period of one year and there should be 
minimum gap  of one year before the same employee is deployed for similar 
duties.   
9.1.24  Incentive  Bonus   
I) Time Office  enters data of Time Allowed  and Time taken from the Job  
Cards/Squad Cards duly passed by Rate  Fixer and Inspector . 
“Shop /Category  Entry Opt ion” in IPAS  is used to modify the Shop, 
Section  and Incentive  category of employee as per requirement during the 
current  month  and update the changes in employee m aster table. The 
entered data are checked with Appendix  Statement received from Shop - 
in- Charge  and completed Job cards  received from Time Office and then 
processed for posting to Salary . 
II) Incent ive is calculated by multiplying the net time  saved by the incentive  
hourly rate  prescribed  for each category of worker. The Essential Indirect  
Workers and Ju nior Supervisors are paid bonus  at 80% of the average  
bonus  earnings  of the section . 
III) Incentive  to the SSEs  is linked to the basic pay  and allowed at 15 percent 
of the basic pay . 
IV) Biometric  attendance  is made compulsory in Workshops  / Production  
Units . 
V) The revised rates are give n effect from 1st July 2017.  
9.1.25  Productivity  Linked Bonus  
I) Whether the period of Leave  without pay  was excluded for arriving the 
wages  per day?  
II) Whether the employee was in servic e for a minimum period of six months 
both in the cases of new  appointment  and employees  retired  on 
superannuation?  
III) Whether pro -rata payment was made in case the employee serv ed for less 
than a year?  
IV) Whether wages  per day was arrived at correctly?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
48 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.1.26  Composite  Transfer  Grant  
I) Whether the employee transferred is on administrative ground  or on own 
request?  
II) Whether Composite  transfer grant  is granted  to those employees  whose 
new Headquarters  is above 20km from old one?  
III) Whether the charges  for transportati on of personal effects were paid for 
shorter route  by road or train?  
9.1.27  Last Pay  Certificate  
I) Whether pay  drawn in new  accounting unit  is based on the last pay  drawn 
of pay  fixed  with reference to last pay  drawn as per last pay  certificate  
certified by the Accounts  Officer of the previous unit ? 
II) Whether all outst anding  dues of loans  and advances  were noted in the 
register  concerned in the new  Accounting Unit ? 
III) Whether the employee was occupying or vacated the Railway  
accommodation in old headquarters .  If not vacated whether permission 
was obtained for retention of quarters  with normal rent  or penal rent?  
IV) Whether rent , electrical energy  charges  and water  charges  were noted in 
the new  Accounting unit  to make recovery?  
9.1.28  Rent  Charges  
I) Number of staff  residing in the r ailway  accommodation in the bill unit  
should be compared with the rent  roll; difference if any should be 
examined.  
II) Number of staff  drawing  house  rent allowance should be compared with 
the rent roll  to find the irregular drawal  of house rent allowance by the 
employees  residing in railway  accommodation.  
III) Rent  charges  at the prescribed  rate advised by Railway  Board  from time  
to time  are to be recovered from the residents of railway  accommodation.  
IV) Whethe r sharing of accommodation is made with spouse  / sibling/ 
son/daughter who are also government employee? If so, whether house  
rent allowance is paid to them and rent recovered from any one of them 
should be checked  with reference to their pay  bills or with their offices.  
V) IPAS  has a provision for recovery of rent  charges  from the employees  
occupying the quarters  / government accommodation. An official of 
Engineering  department is to maintain records of Quarters occupied and 
he is responsible for advising various monthly  charges  (rent, Geyser, 
Lawn, Fan, Cooler etc.)  to be recovered from the salary of the employees .  
9.1.29  Electricity  energy  charges  and water  charges  
I) Whether electricity energy  charges  and water  charges  were recovered for 
the quarters  occupied at old headquarters  based on last pay  certificate ?  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
49 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) In the case of employees  occupying quarters  newly, the above charges  are 
to be recovered from the date of occupation as per rent  roll, besides 
stopping of house  rent allowance.  
III) IPAS  has a provision for recovery of electricity charges  through 
Electricity  module . An official of Electrical  Department  is responsible for 
advising Electricity Charges (Fix ed Cost & Electricity Consumption  
charges ) based on the rates fixed  by respective Electricity Boards time  to 
time. 
9.1.30  Recovery  of Provident  Fund and withdrawal  from PF  account  
I) In IPAS , PF module  processes the PF application  of the employees  for 
sanction and mai ntains the ledger  account  of the employees . 
II) Whether the Provident  Fund  contribution  is recovered at 1/12th of 
emoluments per month  drawn by t he employee?  
III) Whether subscription  recovered from pay  arrear paid to the employee?  
IV) Whether provident  fund subscription  is recovered from the staff  who 
contributes for nati onal pension scheme?  
V) Whether provident  fund subscription  is correctly credited  to PF  ledger  
account ? 
VI) Whether advance /temporary withdrawal  is recovered from the month  
following the month  of withdrawal and recovery fully completed?  
VII) Whether withdrawal  is permitted to the limits prescribed  for each purpose 
but for any purpose it s hould not exceed the 90% of the available amount 
at the credit  of the employee?  
VIII) Whether any withdrawal  is permitted over and above the amount at the 
credit  of the employee along with interest ? There should not be any minus 
credit  to any account . 
IX) Whether interest  is credited  at the prescribed  rate which is revised once in 
a quarter?  
X) In case of inop erative  account , whether interest  is paid to a maximum  
period of six months only?  
XI) Whether action  is taken to credit  the amount which is kept under deposit  
for more than three years without settlement?  
XII) Whether the amount of provident  fund at credit  is transferred to the 
account  of the employee transferred to another accounting unit ? 
9.1.31  National  Pension  Scheme  
I) Whether PRAN  was obtained to all employees  who were appointed on or 
after 01.01.2004? In the case officials appointed during 01.01.2004 to 
28.10.20 09 have opted to switch over to old pension scheme, their 
eligibility to be verified?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
50 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Whether nation pension scheme subscription  is regularly recovered from 
the salary of the employee from the month  following the month  of 
appointment  at the rate  of 10% of pay  and dearness  allowance?  
III) Whether the recovered amount is regularly transferred to PFRDA ? 
IV) Whether equal Government  Contribution  is paid to the PFRDA  up to 
31.03.2019 and at the rate  of 14% of pay  and DA  from the month  of April 
2019?  
V) Whether any penal interest  was paid for the belated transfer of the NPS  
amount?  
9.1.32  Recovery  of Loans and advances  
I) E-Suspense  module  in IPAS  is dedicated for monitoring  the l oan 
sanctioned  to the employee for HBA  and PCA and recovery. The 
completeness and correctness of data in IPAS are to be ensured.  
II) Whether loans  and advances  sanctioned  for pur chase  of scooter /motor 
car/ PC were utilised for the intended purpose by verifying the submission 
of necessary document within the prescribed  period mentioned in the 
sanction memorandum?  
III) If not, whether employee had remitted the amount in one lump  along with 
penal interest ? 
IV) Whether the principal was recovered fully?  
V) Whether interest  was recovered immediately after the recovery of 
principal was co mpleted?  
VI) In case of HBA , necessary insurance  policy  to cover the amount of loan 
was submitted by the employee  
9.1.33  Recovery  of REGIS  
I) Whether REGIS  subscription  at the prescribed  rate (insurance  and saving 
fund) was recovered from the salary of the employees  from January of the 
following year?  
II) Whether arrears  of GI S subscription  along with interest  were fully 
recovered in the month  of salary after resuming duty  after the period of 
leave  without pay ? 
III) Whether higher rate of subscription  in case of promotion  from Group  C 
to B, and Group B to A recovered from January of the following year?  
IV) Whether necessary entry is made in the service  record regarding the 
change in the group of the employee?  
9.1.34  Profession  Tax 
I) Whether the profession tax  was recovered from the employee according 
to rate  prevailing in the area of local  body in which the employee was 
working?  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
51 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Whether the recovered amount was remitted periodically to the concerned 
local  body by the Accounts  Department ? 
9.1.35  Income  Tax 
I) Whether th e employee allowed tax  deduction under Sec.80(C) had 
submitted necessary supporting documents ? 
I) In case of HRA  exemption granted, whether the employee had submitted 
rent receipt  alongwit h PAN  details of the property  owner ? In case the rent 
paid towards Hose rent is more than Rs. 1 lakh?  
II) Whether IT  recovered from the employee was remitted to the Income  Tax 
department period ically by the Accounts  Department ? 
9.1.36  Pension  
I) Whether non -qualifying  service  was excluded for arriving at the eligible 
number of years of service  / half yearly service ? 
II) Whether average  emolument  was calculated by taking the pay  of 10 
previous months?  
III) Whether the employee had completed 10 years of service  on the date of 
superannuation  or completed 20 years of service  in the case of voluntary  
retirement  for becoming eligible for pension?  
IV) Whether pension amount was calculated at 50% of last pay  drawn or 
average  emolument  whichever is higher?  
9.1.37  Family  Pension  
I) Whether necessary legal  heir certificate  or succession certificate  obtained 
from the competent  authority  was submitted along with the pension 
application ? 
II) Whether Family  pension was arrived at the prescribed  percentage  (now 
30% unif ormly) based on the number of years of service ? 
III) Whether the amount of family  pension at enhanced rate  payable on the 
death of the pensioners does not exceed original pension which was 50% 
of last pay  drawn by the employee?  
IV) Whether the enhanced family  pension was payable up to a maximum  
period of seven years in case the pensioner died or a maximum  of 10 years 
if an employee died while in service ? 
9.1.38  Death  cum Retirement  Gratuity  
I) Whether number of years of qualifying  service  was correctly arrived for 
calculation of retirement  gratuity?  
II) Whether amount paid exceeded the maximum  limit of Rs. 20 lakh?  
III) Whether the amount was paid to the heirs according to the percentage  
mentioned in the nomination  forms submitted by the deceased employee?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
52 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) In the case of employees  died while in service , whether the amount paid 
towards Funeral Advance  was adjusted in the payment made to the 
nominee(s)?  
9.1.39  Commutation  
I) Whether commutatio n was paid to the employee immediately after 
retirement ? In case this was arranged after one year, whether necessary 
medical  certificate  was submitted by the employee?  
II) Whether the e mployee furnished the percentage  of pension to be 
commuted  subject to a maximum  of 40%.?  
III) Whether the commuted  value was adopted as per the commutation  table 
advised by  DOPT  depends upon age on the next birth day of the 
employee?  
9.1.40  Workmen  Compensation  claims  
I) Whether the accident  happened at the work  place during and in the course 
of emp loyment?  
II) Whether the percentage  of temporary, partial or permanent  disablement 
adopted for giving compensation  was as certified by the medical  
authority ? 
9.1.41  Group Insurance  payments  
The audit of Insurnace Payment is to be done as audit of Worksmen 
Compensation Claim referred in p ara N o. 9.1.40 . 
9.1.42  Maintenance  of Leave  Accounts  
The IPAS  has a provision for maintaining leave  accounts  of all employees  
through leave  module . To ensure correctness of the leave  accounts , it should 
be checked to see:  
I) Whether the date of appointment  was correctly recorded as in the Service  
Book/ Office  order of appointment in the Leave  account  since it is the 
determining factor for first credit  of LAP /LHAP ? 
II) In the case of first appointment  and also at the time  of retirement  whether 
advance credit  of LA P and LHAP  were given only for the completed 
calendar  months of service  i.e., at 2.5 days per month  and 1.67 days per 
month  respectively?  
III) Whether certified balance  of leave  at credit  was received from the 
previous Accounts  Officer, in the case of transfer of employees  from one 
Accounting Unit  to another Accounting Unit?  
IV) Whether the  period of leave  availed  as recorded in the Muster  
Roll/Attendance  Register  and in the leave  statement are sent by the leave  
sanctioning authority  to the concerned section ? 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
53 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Whether un -availed Joining  Time was credited  correctly in the case of 
employees  transferred on administrative ground  and not on own request 
to a p lace of more than 20 km?  
VI) Whether 1/10th of leave  without medical  Certificate  availed during 
previous half year is deducted while affording credit  of LAP  in the 
ensuing half year s ubject to a maximum  of 15 days?  
VII) Similarly, while affording credit  of LHAP , a deduction of 1/18th of the 
period of dies -non sanctioned  during the previous half year was made?  
VIII) In case of encashme nt of leave  salary for 10 days, the number of leave  
encashed is correctly debited  in the leave  account ? 
IX) The encashment  of leave  should not exceed 60 days in the entire service  
X) In case of manual  leave  account , the balance  of leave  is correctly carried 
forward to the next page.  
XI) In case of leave  not due sanctioned , the number of days sanctioned  should 
be adjusted in the subsequent advance credit  of LHAP . 
XII) Whether child  care leave  is maintained properly in the leave  account ? 
XIII) Whether the leave  salary was paid at the rate  of pay  drawn prior to the 
period of leave ? 
XIV)  Whether the leave  salary was paid to the female railway  employee during 
child  care leave  at 100% for the first 365 days and at 80% for the 
remaining period?  
XV) Whether the child  care leave  was sanctioned  in excess of 730 days in the 
entire career and in excess of three times in a year?  
XVI)  Whether child  care leave  was sanctioned  to the emplo yees whose children  
were above 18 years of age?  
9.2  Audit  of Expenditure  
9.2.1  Audit  of Estimates  
The check of estimates  should be done  along with the audit  of contracts , 
contractors ’ bills  and completion  reports .  A record of the estimates  so checked 
may be kept in the v oucher  selection register . 
In reviewing the estimates  along with contracts  etc. it should be especially seen 
that all the contracts  are in conformity with the estimates  and also how the 
estimates  have been framed  keeping in view the various specifications , drawings  
etc. While there is likely to be some time -lag between such review of estimates  
correlated with contracts  and the sanction to estimates , the following points may 
also be looked into in the initial stage itself in course of audit  of sanctions  to 
estimates , review of annual  works  programme , review of major  works  etc. 
I) the propriety  of justification  for the expenditure  that is proposed to be 
incurred. (This includes check of financial  return/assumption for 
calculation of return etc. of the project);  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
54 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) the incidence  and classification  or allocation  of the charges ; 
III) the existence of the sanction of competent  authority ; and  
IV) the cost  of the estimate  is not unduly inflated.  
The repor t accompanying the estimate  should first be read with a view to 
understand thoroughly the nature, object and scope  of the work . If the report is 
incomplete or if additional  information is consi dered necessary for a definite 
settlement of, say, the question of allocation , the papers concerning the evolution 
of the proposal for the work  should be called for and looked into.  It should also 
be seen that the estimate does not contain provision for any item that is not 
legitimately chargeable  to Railway  Funds  or a charge of an unusual  nature 
requiring special  sanction.  
As regards propriety  of justification  of the work , an adequate return on the 
expenditure  proposed to incur may be expected either in the shape of enhanced 
revenue or of reduction in expenses  or in other cases the work  may be essential 
either for safety  of the line  or in the pursuance of settled policy  or for other valid 
reasons.  An item of expenditure  which prima -facie is wasteful or un -
remunerative  or on which expenditure  already incurred elsewhere seems likely to 
prove unfruitful or of which the result is still awaited should ordinarily be the 
subject of comment.  In th e case of estimates  for new  constructions , where this 
factor is relevant, any proposed or accepted guarantee should be examined and 
tested in the light of known or likely circumstances.   
Estimates  chargeable  partly to main lines and partly to worked lines (i.e. lines 
constructed by local  bodies, State  Government  etc., but worked by main line  
system ) and those relating to deposit  works  and joint stations  with other than 
Indian  Railways  should receive particular attention.  
In the case of works  requir ed to meet the immediate needs of traffic  etc. and 
started on Urgency Certificates it should be verified that no expenditure  is 
incurred before the sanction of the Urgency Certificates by the competent  
authority  and that the due date for submission of the detailed estimates  as 
specified in the Urgency Certificates is observed.  It should also be examined 
whether the Urgency Certificate  has not been issued long after the proposal for 
the new  construction  was administratively approved . 
9.2.2  Audit  of Revenue  Allocation  Registers  
The postings of audited  bills should be traced into the works  and allocation  
registers .  When subsidiary  registers  and records are maintained, e.g., actual 
expendi ture on worked lines, the postings of the documents  in the subsidiary  
registers  or records should also be checked.  
The reconciliation  of Works  Registers with the General  Books  should be 
reviewed in order to see that early action  is taken to trace and clear all 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
55 
For internal use of IA&AD  discrepancies.  It is desirable that a detailed scrutiny should be made of the 
registers  of one division or abstract each month  so as to complete the entire field 
in a year.  The actual process of reconciliation may be tested occasionally be 
Audit . 
All works  registers  should be reviewed as prescribed .  The expenditure  should be 
compared with the sanctioned  estimate  and excesses traced into the objectionable  
items register .  Where expenditure  has been incurred without estimate, it should 
be seen that these are also included in the objectionable  items register .  In these 
cases,  it should also be seen that the works  concerned have been undertaken under 
urgency certificates as provided in the rules .  Where large number of works  have 
been taken up for execution  before estimates  are p repared and sanctioned , it 
should be seen whether sufficient action  has been taken by the Accounts  Office  
to put a stop to the irregular practice .  Audit  shoul d at this stage be particularly 
on the look -out for material  modifications  between the estimates  and the actual 
work  carried out.  It should also be seen that expenditure  incurred without 
sanctioned  estimates  and on abstract estimates  is held under objection.  
Expenditure  incurred in the absence of regular sanction to a work  not prov ided 
for in the detailed budget  of the year should be scrutinized to see whether it 
involves a new  service  not contemplated in the budget. In  the review of works  
registers  it should  be seen that adequate control  is exercised by the Railway  
Administration  over the closure of the accounts  and preparation of completion  
reports  of w orks and that there are no cases of abnormal delays in closing 
accounts  of works  after physical  completion of a work .  All cases in which there 
has been undue  delay in  the submission of completion reports should be examined 
and the delays in adjustment of released material  and other points contributing to 
the delay in closing the accounts  of works , which would seem to be a voidable, 
should be taken up with Administration.  
9.2.3  Audit  of Works  Registers  
I) Check  the registers  with reference to estimates  and appropriations .  Larg e 
variations between the expenditure  and appropriation  in the year will have 
to be brought out as explanations for variations in the Appropriation  
Accounts . 
II) See whether expend iture is proportionately progressive  as against 
allotment and that no expenditure  is incurred in regard to items not 
included in the estimate . 
III) See that the date of completion  of work  is recorded and also the date on 
which the completion reports  are sent to the Accounts  Officer, thus 
showing the delay, if any, in the submission of completion reports.  
IV) See that no additi onal works  not provided in the estimate  are included 
under “contingencies ”. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
56 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) See that the register  is properly closed monthly  and initia lled by a gazett ed 
officer.  
VI) See that the percentage  of improvement element in the expenditure  
incurred during the year on replacement  of assets  at the cost  of DRF  has 
been correctly worked out and shown in the works  register  for the purpose 
of exhibition in Block  Account . 
VII) Whether the columns ‘advance payment for supply  of material ’ and 
“value of materials  received in advance of payment to contractor” are 
properly maintained in the works  registers  and regularly reconciled with 
those in the subsidiary  registers  for the respective suspense  heads.  
9.2.4  Audit  of Objectionable Items Register  
The positing in the objectionable  item register  should be check ed at the time  of 
reviewing the works  registers .  It should be seen that:  
I) the register  contains the objections raised both by Accounts  and Audit ; 
II) the objections ar e properly classified  under the heads:  
a) want of sanctioned  estimates ; 
b) excess over sanctioned  estimates ; 
c) want of sanctioned  appropriation ; 
d) excess over sanctioned  appropriation ; and  
e) Miscellaneous . 
III) The register  is closed periodically in the prescribed  manner; and correct 
statistics are prepared at the end of the year for the purpose of exhibition 
in Annexure A  (Statement of expenditure  held under objection) to the 
Appropriation  Accounts . 
IV) If the p ercentage  of expenditure  under objection to the total expenditure  
is abnormally large or if there is undue  delay on the part of the Railway  
Administration  in removing the objections, the matter may be reported to 
the DAI . 
9.2.5  Audit  of Contracts  
Works  executed through agencies of contractors  generally fall under any one  or 
more of the following categories – 
I) Zonal  works  – such as ordinary repairs , maintenance  and other petty  
works  in a particular zone.  
II) Special  works  – such as construction  of bridges , quarters , formation of 
embankments etc.  
III) Supply  of building  material , other stores  etc. 
The contracts  are to be reviewed in audit  at the tender  acceptance stage and also 
on completion  of their execution .  While conducting audit of contracts  the general 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
57 
For internal use of IA&AD  policy  of the Government  that tenders  should be invited and dealt with in a public  
manner, contracts  should be executed on behalf of the President  by an authority  
competent  to do so under the rules  and the fundamental principles  laid down by 
the Government of India  for the guidance  of th e authorities  competent to enter 
into contracts  or agreements should be borne in mind.  
The audit  of contracts  should cover an examination of (i) the system  of entering 
into contracts , (ii) form of the contracts  and (iii) the specific conditions and rates 
etc, on which the work  is to be done or the supplies are to b e made.  It should be 
seen that - 
a) proper  arrange ments exist for giving due publicity for tenders  invited 
and the response is quite good.  Where the response for tenders  is poor, 
the reasons therefor should be examined and remedial  measures  may 
be suggested to the Railway  Administration  to improve the position;  
b) before acceptance of the tendered rates, their reasonableness and 
competitiveness have been established ; 
c) there is no undue  delay in finalization of tenders  and communication  
of its acceptance to the tenderer;  
d) the reasons for not accepting the lowest tender  have been recorded;  
e) except  in exceptional cases, an inc rease in rates or ex -gratia payment 
is not allowed after acceptance of tender .  Increases in rates and ex -
gratia payments, if too frequently approved , render the principle of 
calling for tenders  more or less nugatory and such cases should be 
scrutinized in audit  jealousy;  
f) the increased rates, where agreed to, is definitely committed in 
writing.   Otherwise, courts  of law  hold that the rates in the original 
agreements sh ould be taken as abandoned and if any other agreement 
has not been executed the determination of the equitable  rate for 
payment becomes a matter of difficulty, time  bargaining and 
sometimes lead to costly litigat ions;  
g) no important changes are made in the form of standard contract  
documents  nor new  types of contract  documents  used, deviations 
noticed, if any, being advised to DAI ; 
h) the agreements are not deliberately or inadvertently split up so as to 
evade the necessity of obtaining the sanction of higher authority  to the 
award  of the contract ; 
i) the contracts  are in conformity with the estimates  and also how the 
estimates  have been framed  keeping in view the various 
specifications , drawings  etc; 
j) the terms of the contract  are precise and definite leaving no room for 
ambiguity or misconstruction therein;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
58 
For internal use of IA&AD  k) the rates allowed for small works , for which no agreements but only 
work  orders are issued, are not in excess of the schedule  of rates for 
the particular division.  On Railways  where copies of work  orders are 
not received in the Accounts  Office , the check should be applied 
during local  inspections ; 
l) In lump  sum contracts , to be subjected to such checks  as are 
practicable, a provision is made explicitly for reductions in the event 
of any item of work  being omitted o r replaced by less costly designs .  
The form employed is of a type that has been sanctioned  by higher 
authority  and accepted on legal  advice;  
m) the conditions for supply  of rai lway  material  required to be used by 
the contractor are explicitly stated in the contract ; 
n) the penalties  provided for in the contract  are not waived where the 
railway  has suffered definitely ascertainable loss / inconvenience due 
to failure  of the contractor to complete the work  or supply  the material  
within the stipulated time , without recording adequate grounds for 
waiver;  
o) the particulars regarding quantity and rates are prescribed  and the 
prices stipulated are firm and the rates are as per schedule  of rates.  
Whereas the rates are highe r than schedule of rates market trend of 
percentage  increase should be ascertained wherever possible.  The 
cases of acceptance of rates below schedule of rates should be 
investigated.  Particulars of the contracts  provi ding price variation 
clause or provisional rates should be examined;  
p) there is no omission of any important clause e.g. inspection  of stores , 
date and place of delivery, despatch instructions , name of c onsignee , 
etc.; 
q) it is signed by an authority  who is competent  to enter into contracts  
and simultaneously signed by the contractor or his authorized agent;  
r) the security  deposit  in the appropriate  form and of correct amount has 
been lodged within the period stipulated in the contract  and that in the 
event of default, penalties  leviable under the condit ions of contract  
have been enforced; and  
s) In case of default in the execution  of contract  by the contractor’s  
contract  has been placed on some other contractor to complete the 
work  at the risk  and cost  of the defaulting  contractor within the 
stipulated period of 6 months from the date of defaulter after fulfilling 
all the legal  formalities viz., issue  of notices etc.  
A record should be kept of the contracts  reviewed, number of cases in which 
tenders  other than the lowest have been accepted and the number of cases in 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
59 
For internal use of IA&AD  which audit  has questioned the exercise of d iscretion by the officers accepting the 
tenders . 
9.2.6  Audit  of Vouchers  of payment  
In auditing  of payment vouchers  it should generally be seen that:  
I) the voucher  is in a prescribed  form, no particulars or signatures  required 
by the form applicable to the cases of charge have been omitted;  
II) each voucher  is the original;  
III) it is for a current  and s pecific claim and the period to which the payment 
relates and the allocation  of the charge are clearly shown upon the 
voucher ; 
IV) It is signed by the officer or officers responsible for the accuracy  and the 
propriety  of the expenditure  in all necessary places.  Signature by stamp 
or in pencil should not be accepted;  
V) it is properly filled up and headed;  
VI) it bears an order of the responsible officer to pay  a spec ified sum and a 
note whether the payment is to be or has been made by cash  or by cheque;  
VII) the nature of the charge is such as may rightly be made against 
Government  and for the work  or service  to which it is debited ; 
VIII) the rates paid are not much higher than those usually paid in the locality 
for a similar service ; 
IX) the outlay  is fully detailed and quantities are always given of work  done 
and of material  supplied;  
X) the details work  up to the totals and all arithmetical  calculations are 
correct;  
XI) the total of each bill as well as of the amount paid is expressed in words 
as well as in figures;  
XII) no erasure or alteration of figures was made in the voucher .  When 
corrections are necessary, they should be made in red ink , leaving the 
original legible after being crossed out and initialled by a responsible 
official;  
XIII) correction s in the total or in the amount paid are attested by both the payee 
and the drawer of the bill;  
XIV)  the place of payment and name of the officer or subordinate  before whom 
payment was made are given;  
XV) the voucher  bears a form al receipt  of the person in whose favour the bill 
is drawn and is duly stamped if the gross amount exceeds Rs.500; and the 
sum acknowledged is written in words as well as in figures;  
XVI)  the signature  of the payee is witnessed  when made by a seal or by a mark 
and also in cases even when he signs his name, when he is not well known 
and is paid in cash .  The signature  of the payee as well as of the witness 
should be dated;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
60 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVII)  each voucher  is cancelled in some efficient way and receipt  stamps are 
defaced so as to tender  them unusable;  
Note  Defacement  of bills  and supporting documents . The supporting 
documen ts of bill should be defaced by showing the particulars of the bills  
on which the charges  due have actually been passed to prevent them from 
being passed a second time  for payment.  
XVIII)  the signatures  of all the partners in a contract  as recorded in the contract  
deed are upon the receipt , except in the case of well -known firms; and  
XIX)  the receipt  is for the full amount wh en a bill is satisfied partly by stores  
supplied.  
XX) In Price variation contract (Works  contract), the fixed component of 15%  
will not attract any price variation14. 
9.2.7  Audit  of Contractors’ bills  
Normally all ‘on account ’ bills  relating to the final ‘bills  selected for audit  should 
be checked along with final bills.  In respect of final bills selected for audit the 
relevant contracts  should also be reviewed simultaneously.  In addition, during 
local  inspections  the interim payments and the final bills in respect of selected 
contracts  should be reviewed to see that the paym ents have been made in 
accordance with the contracts  and extra contractual payments or concessions  are 
justified and authorized.  During this review of the contracts  audit should also 
look into the ar bitration  and court  cases involving the contracts .  In respect of big 
contract  works  costing  over Rs.50 lakhs which are in progress one or two ‘on 
account ’ bills relating to each such work  may also be checked during the year 
mainly to ensure that these works  come under regular central  audit  which will 
supplement  the check during inspection  of major  works  as prescribed  in the 
Revised  Audit  Manual . 
Bills  should be examined to see that they ar e in accordance with the terms of the 
agreements and in proper form.  Where a contractor was to use material  supplied 
from railway  stock  it should be seen, when the rates for such material  are higher 
than market rates, that the contractor has taken all the material  from the Railway  
which he was required to take under agreement and has not purchased it from the 
market; also where such rates are lower than market rates that the contractor has 
not taken more material  than that to which he was entitled.  This last point should 
be specially noted.  
Where the rate  for the finished goods  to be supplied by the contractor was bas ed 
on supply  of raw material  by the Railway  at predetermined rates but the 
contractor, instead of taking it from the railway , purchased the raw material  at 
                                                           
14Authority:  Railway Board  letter No. 2007/CE -I/CT/18 Pt.19 dated 14 -12-2012 and in Stores contract, Railway 
Board  letter No. 70/RS (G) 779/46 dated 13.03.1981  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
61 
For internal use of IA&AD  lower rates from th e market, it should be seen that suitable reduction is obtained 
in contract  rate. 
Quantities in bills  should be compared with those provided for in the estimate  and 
abnormal excesses, if of finan cial significance, should form the subject of 
comment.  Items showing minus figures in the quantity or the money columns of 
contractor’s bills  may be the result of previous over -payments either legitimate 
or otherwise, e.g. earth -work  originally described as hard and paid for at a higher 
rate may subsequently be classified  as soft and paid for at a lower rate , the 
necessary deduction being made in the final bill.  In s uch cases the reasons for 
the original over -payments may be carefully scrutinized.  
Bills  may contain alternations in the quantities of works  to be paid for or addenda 
to the original work  orders.  In such cases, it would be advisable to obtain the 
measurement  books , etc. from the local  officers so as to complete the audit  check 
properly instead of postponing the same to the next inspection .  
The following further points should be borne in mind in checking the 
contractors ’ bills :– 
I) if the bills  are for tools  or other articles  of equipment  for wh ich an 
inventory  is prescribed , it has been certified by the responsible officer that 
the necessary addition has been made in the inventory ; 
II) in respect of bills  of purchases arranged by t he Controller  of Stores  for 
direct  supply  to the Indenting Officer, the rates charged therein are those 
accepted by the Controller of Stores and that the stores  have been 
acknow ledged by the receiving subordinate  officer;  
III) if the contractor has been issued any material  outside the contract  or used 
material  in excess of the requirements of a work  necessary supervision 
and freight  charges  have been charged and recovered together with the 
cost of material  (cf. Para 1269 E ); 
IV) the quantity of released material  dismantled  from a work  generally agrees 
with the quantity of dismantlement paid for;  
V) quantity for “lead “and “lift” of earthwork  does not exceed the quantity 
for excavation paid for;  
VI) the allowance for ‘voids’, ‘shrinkage’ etc., has been made either in the 
rates or in the measurement  when necessary;  
VII) in the case of running  or ‘on account ’ bills  which are not the first of the 
series, it should be verified that all “up -to-date” and other figures which 
are dependent upon the entries in the previous ‘on account ’ bills , are 
correct by making a reference to the last ‘on account ’ bill;  
VIII) the date of work  order or agreement is not later than the date of 
measurement ; 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
62 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) the usual 10 per cent deduction on account  of security  deposit  is made 
from ‘on account ’ bills  and that proper entries have been made in the 
contractors ’ ledger ; 
X) the quantity charged for in all the previous ‘on account ’ bills , plus the 
quantity executed since the last contract  certificate , agrees with the total 
up-to-date quantity charged in the final bill;  
XI) total quantity charg ed for in the final bills  agrees with the details in the 
measurement  books .  It will not be necessary to check all the final bills  
with the measurement  books , this being an item of work  to be done at 
local  inspections .  This check may be exercised where considered 
necessary;  
XII) earth work  originally paid for as ‘soft’ is not classified  as ‘hard’ or 
‘mixed’ with moorum  etc. and paid for at a higher rate .  Where such 
instances come to notice the reasons for change in classification  should 
be carefully scrutinized;  
XIII) the amount paid in all  previous ‘on account ’ bills  have been deducted 
from the total amount of the final bills ; 
XIV)  necessary entries are made in the contractor’s ledger  and the same closed 
and that the refund  of security  is correctly made; and  
XV) when payment due to a contractor is made to financing banks, it should 
be seen that there is a receipt  given by the bank  holding a power  of 
attorney or tran sfer deed from the contractor.  
9.2.8  Audit  of Contractors’ Ledger  
The correctness of the postings of the gross amounts of deductions from the 
audited  bills into the contractor’s ledger  should be checked.  The contractor’s 
account  should be reviewed to see that all amounts due from him have been 
recovered.  It should also be seen that there is a systematic reconciliation  between 
the contractors ’ ledger  and the column due to or due by contractors ’ in the works  
register .  If advances  have been made to contractors , it should be se en that there 
is proper sanction for them and sufficient security  against loss  to the railway . 
It should be seen that contractor’s ledger  is posted as bills  are paid;  that the 
accou nts have been closed and balanced monthly  under the initials of the gazetted  
officer and that in the case of accounts  still open, a long time  has not elapsed 
since the date of the last entry in the ledger  account . The delay in the receipt  of 
subsequent bills  may be due to stoppage of work  for want of funds or late  receipt 
of special  class material  or to a dispute or objections raised by the contractor as 
to rates etc.  The reasons for inordinate delay in the receipt of subsequent bills in 
the accounts  office should be looked into and, if importa nt, followed up.  
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
63 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.2.9  Audit  of Measurement  Books  
The measurement  book  is a very important original record and is liable to be 
required as evidence in a court  of law .  Entries should be made in it at the site of 
the work  and not copied into it from loose sheets .  An intelligent scrutiny of the 
measurement  books  will sometimes indicate violations of this rule.  Deductions 
may sometimes be drawn from a comparison  of the dates in measurement  books  
with the travelling  allowance bills  or those who are supposed to have made or 
checked the measurement . Frequent corrections in the quantities in measurement  
book, although duly initialled, should be scrutinized to see if they appear to be 
bonafide.  
9.2.10  Audit  of Completio n Reports /Completion Estimates  
The scrutiny of completion  reports  should generally be on the same lines as for 
the original estimates .  The relevant estimates  and contracts  should also be 
reviewed simultaneously.  Completion  reports for works  which show appreciable 
variations in expenditure  compared with estimates  should be specially noted with 
a view to see whether, judged as a whole, there is any slackening of effort in 
regard to the efficiency  and accuracy  in the preparation of estimates .   
In addition, the total expenditure  on the works  as shown in the completion  report 
should be compared with that booked in the works  register  and the det ails verified 
to see whether there have been any material  modifications  requiring the sanction 
of the higher .  It should be seen that: - 
I) the allocation  of expenditure  as between C apital , DF, DRF , OLWR  etc. 
in respect of mixed works  has been correctly made;  
II) where the works  are partly debitable to the Railway  and partly to other 
Railways / Govt . Departments / private  parties’ proper shares are adjusted 
before the accounts  of the works  are closed;  
III) in the case of works  which are financi ally justified at the time  they were 
sanctioned , whether the justification  still holds good despite an increase 
in the total expenditure  in completing the work ; 
IV) all mate rial charged to the work  or works  but not used up have been 
returned to stores  or transferred elsewhere and the accounts  of the work  
credited  with the ir value and the credit  for released material  provided for 
in the estimate  has been adjusted against the work  concerned;  
V) the completion  report has been prepared in the prescri bed form and 
sanctioned  by competent  authority ; 
VI) objections to expenditure  such as excesses over estimates  are not left un -
regularized for unduly  long periods with the intention of regularizing 
them through completion  estimates ; 
VII) there is no undue  delay in preparation and disposal  of completion  reports  
after completion of works ; 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
64 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) important differences between the sanctioned  amounts and actual 
expenditure  have been suitably explained;  
IX) the completion  reports  have be en noted in the Register  of Works  and 
verified by the Accounts  Office  concerned; and  
X) When  the work  is for the use of an outside body such as the construction  
of assisted sidings , interest  and maintenance  charges  are recovered not 
from the date of sanction to the completion  report but from the date the 
work  was ph ysically completed and brought into use.  
9.3  Stores  Accounts  
9.3.1  General  
It is important that the organization  and procedure of the local  stores  Departmen t 
should be studied carefully and the audit  procedure modified to suit local  
conditions and the method of internal  check.  
The check of stores  bills should embrace a scrutiny of all bills  including those for 
purchases through other departments  e.g. the Controller  of Printing and 
Stationery and Stamps  etc.  It should be seen that the payment for purcha ses 
through other departments is a proper charge against the work  or other head  of 
account  concerned and that the expenditure  has been sanctioned  by competent  
authority .  The postings in the Stores  Priced Ledgers /Transaction Register  should 
be checked.  
The selection of vouchers  may be done either from the register  of bills  or in any 
other suitable manner.  
The bills  for the purchase  of stores  should be checked to see  
I) that the particulars agree with the purchase  orders and the acce pted 
tenders  as regards the rates, the date of supply  and the quantity to be 
supplied;  
II) that the receipt  of stores  has been duly acknowledged;  
III) that the arithmetical  calculat ions are correct; and  
IV) that due precautions have been taken to guard against the passing of a 
second claim for the same stores . 
A local  scrutiny of the purchase  orders in the office of the Controller  of Stores , 
simultaneously with the review of stores  contracts , as prescribed , should be done 
to see inter alia that there is no intentional splitting up of purchases, that recourse 
is had to such purchases rarely and to meet emergent requirements only, and that 
the financial  limits as laid  down by the competent  authority  are not exceeded.  
In the case of stores  purchased in India , the Funds  Register  (vide 506-S), or any 
other document used for watching the progress of purchases against grants, 
should be reviewed as prescribed .  While auditing  the stores  bills the relevant 
receipt  notes  should be linked .  After audit  of the bills , their posting into the 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
65 
For internal use of IA&AD  Purchase  Accounts  register  and the priced ledger /transaction register  should be 
checked.  
9.3.2  Stores  Journals  
Journal  Slips relating to stores  transactions, prepared according to paragraph  
2932 -S, should be scrutinized in the  manner laid  down in the paragraph .  It should 
be seen that journal  is properly posted and that the reconciliation  of the subsidiary  
books  with the journal and the later with the General  Books  of the railway  is made 
monthly  and certified to as being completed.  
9.3.3  Stores  Accounts  Current  
The monthly  Account  Current  of stores  transactions, where such an account  is 
prepared by the Stores  Accounts  branch, should be examined in full detail.  The 
opening balance  should be compared with the closing balance  of the previous 
month , the debits  and credits  examined and traced from the Debit and Credit  
summaries  printed  from the monthly  summary tape as part of the monthly  
processing.  The closing balance  should be proved by ascertaining the items of 
which it is composed, with reference to the debits and credits  summaries  printed  
depot -wise.  It should be seen that the balances in the Stores Account Current  are 
reconciled with corresponding balances in the General  Books  on one hand  and 
with balances in the class ledgers  on the other.  The total receipts  and issues 
during a month  should be similarly reconciled.  
On certain railways, register  of class ledger  is maintained manually by Accounts  
Office  for receipts  and issues separately.  The receipts  and issues are abstracted 
into seven categories of stores  each month .  In Audit , the depot -wise class ledgers  
should be totalled up and the totals agreed with the totals of the seven categories 
into which the stores  transactio ns are abstracted every month  by the Accounts 
Office.  It should be further seen that the stores  balances are properly agreed with 
General  Book balances and the agreement is duly attested.  The procedure of 
reconciliation  with General Books  may be adopted with such modifications  as 
may be necessary by local  conditions.  
9.3.4  Suspense  Registers  
Stores  in Transi t: This register  should be reviewed to see that outstanding  items 
are cleared promptly.  
Deposit  Miscellaneous  and Miscellaneous Advance  Registers:  The analysis  of 
the outstanding  balances should be looked into to see that cases of chronic 
outstanding are not on the increase and all out efforts are made to clear old items.  
Cases of outstanding of heavi er amounts, over one -year-old should be examined 
in detail to see if any unusual  feature exists in such cases.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
66 
For internal use of IA&AD  In all these cases it should also be seen that a systematic reconciliation  is made 
with the General  Books . 
9.3.5  Account  Current  
In addition to the check prescribed  in the programme , some other accounts  should 
be reviewed generally.  The entries  in the Account  Current  should be checked 
with reference to the statement of Debit and Credit  summaries  printed  on the 
computer .  The system  of billing for forms supplied as well as the outstanding  
bills should be reviewed.  It should be seen that where work  has been done for 
other Government  departments  or for f oreign  railways, the charges  for 
supervision and maintenance  and depreciation  of machinery and the fixed  
percentage  for indirect  charges are billed accordin g to rules  and orders in force.  
9.4  Workshop  Accounts  
9.4.1  General  
The outlay  on works  undertaken in the workshops  falls into the following classes: 
- (1) Direct  charges  for labour , (2) direct  charges  for stores , and (3) Shop  General  
and Proforma  on cost . 
Labour  Charges --The important initial documents  in connection with labour  
charges  are (1) Absentee  Statements; (2) Gate  Attendance  Cards ; (3) time  sheets ; 
(4) muster  rolls and labour  pay sheets ; and (5) overtime  sheets .   
On most of the Railways  the labour  pay sheets  of the workshop staff  are prepared 
on the computer  by the same system  as for pay  roll preparation for other staff .  
The instructions  regarding audit  of computerized  pay bills will therefore apply to 
the check of comp uter printed  labour  pay sheets  also. 
Overtime  bills should be examined to see that the allowances  are covered  by 
rules .  The system  of overtime  in vogue may be examined to see that it is 
consistent with efficiency  and economy . 
9.4.2  Audit  of computerized  incentive  bills 
(I) Direct  workers --The incentive  bonus  bills for direct  workers  are printed  
on the computer  shop -wise showing ticket No., shop  and section  code, 
time taken, time  saved or lost , amount saved or lost and the amount 
payable.  The details of employee category, Shop  No., and total `allowed 
time' are available in a separate statement called "Ticket -wise tabulation  
for the month ".  Wherever the 'ticket -wise tabulation ' or Details of Job  
Cards statement' is comprehensive and contains the details of amount 
payable, setup time , proceeding time  and `allowed time ' for each unit , 
audit  scrutiny may be restricted merely  to the agreement of entries in the 
statement with the information on the jobs  cards , arithmetical  check on 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
67 
For internal use of IA&AD  accuracy  of calculations being restricted to 50% of the transactions 
selected for a udit. 
The entries in the job card relating to the `Allowed  Time' (viz. set -up time  
allowed, operation  time etc.) should be checked with reference to the 
scroll sheet maintained in the Production  Department , provided such 
scroll sheet itself is not computer  printed .  If the scroll sheet is printed  on 
the computer, the particulars may be checked with other relevant  records 
e.g. rate  fixer's records etc.  
(II) The Incentive  Bonus  Bill of indirect  workers --These bills  printed  shop -
wise a nd section -wise show for each ticket No., the number of hours 
worked, the average  percentage  earned, the number of hours earned, the 
rate and the total amount earned.  A subsidiary  statement printed  on the 
computer  is the `Incentive Statement' showing Section -wise Standard  
Hours  and Average Percentage For Essential Indirect  Worker s, which 
gives the time  taken, the time  saved and the standard hours of the section  
and based upon this, the average  percentage  earned and 80% of the 
average percentage  as applicable to the Chargemen of the Incentive 
Section.  The entries relating to the time  taken and the time  saved are 
susceptible of verification  with reference to the details in Ticket -wise 
Tabulat ion for the corresponding shop  and section , and should be so 
checked in audit .  As regards the standard hours, which is reckoned with 
reference to the total number of workers  in the section , it is necessary to 
obtain an intermediate print -out showing the number of workers  in the 
Incentive Section.  The arithmetical  calculations in respect of standard 
hours and average percentage  earned by direct  workers  etc. may be 
limited to 50% of the cases selected for audit.  The deductions made in 
the bonus  payable to indirect  workers  on the basi s of idle time  booked 
against direct  workers  under their control , may be checked with reference 
to idle time  cards .  During this check the computer generated idle time  
statement should also be checked with reference to idle time  cards . 
The audit  of incentive  bills both for direct  and indirect  workers  should be 
supplemented by a periodical  review of the action  taken on error  
statement produced on the computer  as below: - 
a) The reconciliation  statement prin ted in respect of direct  workers  
should be checked once a quarter to see that errors  have been correctly 
rectified particularly in respect of losses.  
b) The action  taken on the st atement of cards  printed  in the processing 
of essential indirect  workers  incentive  bills which shows cases of 
essential indirect  workers  not prima facie employed in the incentive  
sections should be reviewed every month . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
68 
For internal use of IA&AD  c) Similarly the statement "GA Hours  Reconciliation --Details for un -
reconciled ticket numbers" should be reviewed and the correctness of 
action  taken thereon should be test checked in audit . 
The statement of Abnormal Profits and Losses which shows all cases of profits  
exceeding 50% and all cases of losses  should be reviewed for the year to see that 
remedial  action  is taken to revise the "allowed time ". 
9.4.3  On Cost  
These charges  represent expenditure  which can not be allocated to any particular 
work  order.  Such charges  are classified  as follows:  
I) Proforma  on-cost 
II) General  on-cost 
III) Shop  on-cost 
A description of these categories and how the charges  are to be arrived at and 
distributed in each case is contained in Chapters VII -W.  It should be seen 
whether the distribution  of on -cost is accurately made according to the codal  
provisions.  
The debits  booked under the various on -cost work  orders should be scrutinized 
to see that they are not used as a dumping ground  for charges  which can be 
allocated directly to other work  orders.  
The chart given in Paragraph 1425 -W illustrate s the various on -cost charges  and 
the profit  percentage  to be added to the prime cost  of jobs  of different kinds.  In 
the case of individual work  order s taken up for audit , it should be seen that the 
correct charges  have been levied.  
9.4.4  Compiled  Accounts  
In order to collect all charges  on account  of lab our and stores  on work  orders a 
workshop general register  (ledger ) is prepared from the allocated abstracts and 
summaries  of labour  and stores .  The outturn  statement is posted there from which 
shows the cost  of all work  including those charged off each month , completed 
jobs awaiting acceptance or adjustments  and works  in progress vide paragraphs  
1201 -1225 -W. 
The postings into the final books , up t o the preparation of the outturn  statement 
and the Account  Current , of the amount spent during the month  on each work  
order taken up for audit  should be checked.  The outstanding  in outturn  statement 
should be scrutinized to see that there has been no delay in making out bills  or in 
getting the acceptance of the parties concerned, and that the outstanding are such 
as sho uld form a proper charge against workshop suspense .  It should also be seen 
that the operations  are all current  and undertaken under competent  sanction, that 
credit  items in the details of balance  are noted for immediate adjustment, and that 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
69 
For internal use of IA&AD  the details of balance  under each work  order consist only of labour  and materials  
expended upon unfinished works . 
Where the workshop general register  is printed  monthly  on the computer  (as 
against one consolidated document showing the progressive  posting from mon th 
to month ) and does not show the month  of origin and the trend of booking  
expenditure , the accuracy  of the compilation  may be checked at th e time  of 
checking outturn  statement and the review of workshop general register  carried 
out along with the review of "Work -shop  Manufacture  Suspense  Balances".  
9.4.5  Outturn  Statement  
It should be seen that the adjustment of outlay  is effected monthly  or on 
completion  in accordance with the rules  on the subject.  The un adjusted items of 
expenditure  should be scrutinized to see that there is no minus balance , that there 
is no outlay  on jobs  prior to issue  of work  orders, that there are no completed jobs  
outstanding  for more than three months, and that outlay  on works  for which no 
estimates  have been sanctioned  is held under objection.  
The expenditure  on completed works  chargeable  to Capital , Depreciation  Reserve  
Fund , Development  Fund and/or Revenue  is posted into the capital  works  and 
revenue allocation  registers .  It should be seen that the closing balance  in 
workshop suspense  is agreed  with the General  Books  every month .  The debits  
on account  of labour  pay sheets  appear in the General Books in the following  
month .  As the value of labour  employed in the shops  must be charged to the 
works  concerned in the month  in which the labour  was engaged though not paid 
for until the fo llowing month , the total labour  will, in the first instance, be taken 
to the debit  side of the account  current  and credited  to the sub -head  "Labour " in 
the workshop suspense  account .  The analysis  of the balance  under this suspense  
head  according to the details in the Labour Book (vide paragraph  1222 -W) should 
be checked and the balance  reconciled with the General Books.  
Under  the comp  uterized  system , preparation of check sheets , as provided in para 
403-W for en suring the correctness of posting of labour  and stores  in the work -
shop  general register  and correct transfer of amount to the outturn  statement, has 
been dispensed wi th.  The accuracy  of the postings should, therefore, be checked 
with reference to the relevant sub -ledgers .  The postings in the outturn  statement 
and the workshop general register  should al so be mutually agreed. The review of 
the outstanding  under the workshop general register  should be supplemented by 
a review of the computer  generated statement called "Monthly  review of 
workshop general registers " and the statement "Review of credit  and irregular 
WMS  balances".  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
70 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.4.6  Workshop  Account  Current  
Paragraphs  1215 and 1216 -W detail the method of preparation of Workshop  
Account  current .  During the course of audi t: 
I) the opening balance  should be checked with the closing balance  of the 
previous month , 
II) the posting under each head  both on debit  and credit  side should be 
checked with the supporting schedules,  
III) the arithmetical  accuracy  should be checked,  
IV) it should be seen that the advices received from the accounts  office have 
been incorporated in the accounts , and  
V) the closing balance  should be analyzed to see that the items are current  
and there is no old outstanding . 
In addition, the labour  schedules  (W-525-526) should also be subjected to check 
with reference to the labour  sub-ledger  and tabulation  statement for indirect  
workers  (cumulative expenses  wise tabulation  for which necessary intermediate 
printout obtained from the Railway  Administration ). 
9.5 Audit  of Traffic  Accounts  
Traffic  Audit  Office  is responsible for audit  of earnings  relating to Coaching  and 
Goods  traffic  of Indian  Railways . At Traffic Audit, the audit of earnings  relating 
to Coaching and Goods traffic  are carried out through local  audit of inspections  
of stations  (booking  offices, passenger  reservation  offices, parcel  offices, luggage  
offices), goods  sheds , sidings , etc. and through Central  Audit  of test check of 
records at Traffic Accounts  Offices. At present, the compliance  audit of Coaching 
and Goods traffic  (local  audits) are activity based taking into account  the risk  
parameters , as per approved  Annual  Audit Plan .  
Coaching  earnings  are earnings  derived from passenger  trains . Most of the 
functions  of Coaching earnings of Indian  Railways  are computerized . Booking  
Offices issues tickets  through UTS  (Unreserved  Ticketing System ). Passenger  
Reservation  Centres issues reservat ion tickets through PRS  (Passenger 
Reservation Systems ). Computerization  of Parcel  Offices and Luggage  Offices 
through PMS  (Parcel Management  System) are in progress and issue  of Railway  
Receipts  and Luggage Tickets through PMS also commenced in select parcel  and 
luggage  offices.  
Goods  earnings  are earnings  derived from goods  trains . Most of the functions  of 
Goods earnings of Indian  Railways  are computerized . Goods sheds  and Sidings  
Issue  Invoices  through FOIS  (Freight  Operations  Information  System ). 
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
71 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.5.1  Audit  of Coaching  Earnings  
I) Passenger  tickets  (reserved and unreserved):  
Passenger  tickets  (reserved) are issued through Passenger Reserv ation  
System  (PRS ) and unreserved passenger  tickets are issued through 
Unreserved  Ticketing System (UTS ).  
During the check of PRS  and UTS  tickets , it is to be seen that  
a) the correctness of the base fare  incorporated in the Master  Fare Table 
as per the fares  in force.  
b) the correctness of fare -dump  train-wise for PRS  and destination -wise 
for UTS  in regard to distance and fares . 
c) the correctness of fare  and other charges  accounted as collected in the 
Daily  Train s Cash  cum summary book (cash  information) statement 
generated for selected days and terminals  on the request of audit . The 
initial records are properly maintained and correct amounts due are 
collec ted in respect of concession, cancellation , etc. and accounted by 
checking the various daily statements generated at these stations . 
II) Parcels  & Luggage  traffic   
Parcel  Way Bills  and Luggage  tickets  are issued through Parcel 
Management  System  in select locations. In other locations, these are 
manually prepared and issued to the pas sengers . 
During the check of Parcel  Way Bills  and Luggage  tickets , it is to be 
seen that  
a) The scale of parcel /luggage  rates applied as per scales notified by the 
restructuring of parcel  rates and revisions thereto.  
b) The distance charged is correct as applicable for the trains  in which 
loaded.  
c) The correctness of amount realized for leased  traffic  as per leasing  
agreements in force for Parcel  Vans and SLRs . 
9.5.2  Audit  of Goods  Earnings  
I) Invoices  
Invoices  (also known as Railway  Receipts ) for goods  traffic  are issued 
through Freight  Operations  Information  System  – Terminal Management  
System (FOIS -TMS ) in all the goods  sheds  and sidings . FOIS is linked 
with Rates  Branch  System (RBS ) for fetching chargeable  distance for 
calculation of freight . 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
72 
For internal use of IA&AD  During the check of Invoices , it is to be seen that:  
a) The system  generated invoice is prepared in pre -printed  stationery and 
continuity of s tationery numbers and RR  numbers are maintained.  
b) The description of commodity  is correct in accordance with 
forwarding notes . 
c) The classification  of commodity  for train load /wagon  load traffic  is 
correct according to the description given in the invoices  
d) The distance charged is correct in conformity with RBS . Generally, 
the shortest distance is charged for goods  traffic  unless the sender opts 
for dearer route . In case of the route offered falls under rationalized  
route, the distance charged is charged as per rationalized routes . 
e) The actual weight  charged is correct duly checking the weighment  
advices and the chargeable  weight is to be verified with the 
permissible carrying capacity of the respective wagons  and in case 
actual weight is higher,  the higher of the actual/chargeable weight is 
to be taken for calculation of freight . In case, the weight loaded is in 
excess of tolerances, punitive charges  are collected as per rules .  
f) The rate per tonne applied is correct as per rate  tables in force.  
g) The concessions , freight  rebates, incentives allowed are correct as per 
rules  in force.  
h) The other charges  like busy sea son surcharge , development  surcharge, 
etc. applied are correct as per rules  in force.  
i) The statutory  levies like GST , etc. levied are correct as per rules  in 
force. In respect of exempted items, the correctness should be ensured.  
j) The manual  interventions made through freight  adjustments  of over 
charge (FAOC) and undercharge (FAUC) are to be analysed for 
necessity , sanction of competent  authority  and the correctness thereof.  
k) The payment of freight  made by any means through cash /demand 
drafts/credit  notes /e-payment mechanis m is correct.  
l) The levy of to -pay surcharge  is correct in respect of permissible to -
pay consignments . 
m) The risk rate for charging Railway  Risk for commodities  under 
Owners Risk is correct.  
n) the rate  circulars  issued by the Administration  in regard to revision  of 
rates/class /chargeable  weight  as per permissible carrying capacity of 
wagons /various charges  are updated correctly in FOIS  on the effective 
dates.  
 
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
73 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Demurrage  and Wh arfage  Statements, Siding  charges  Statements, 
Stabling  charges  statements, etc.  
The levy  and realization of Demurrage  and Wharfage  Statements, Siding  
charges  Statements, Stabling  charges  Statements, etc., are manually 
prepared by the Goods  Sheds  and Sidings .  
a)  Durin g check of demurrage , wharfage , stabling charges  statements, it 
is to be seen that the demurrage hours, wharfage hours and stabling 
periods are calculated correctly with reference to basic records and 
perm issible free  times and dies -non and at prescribed  rates notified 
from time  to time .  
b)  In regard to siding charges , such charges  are collected along with 
freight  at the time  of booking  wherever the siding is not notified for 
through distance traffic  basis. The type of loco  used should also be 
checked for the correctness. The periodical  revision  of siding charges  
are applied correctly for levy  and realization of this charges  also to be 
ensured.  
III) Outstanding  Lists:  
Outstanding  Lists reflect the dues of the goods  sheds  or sidings  to the 
railway  administration. This list includes debits  raised by Traffic  
Accounts  against  the goods  shed or sidings  for short collection of railway  
dues like freight , demurrage , wharfage , siding, stabling charges , etc. as 
per rules  in force. These debits may be admitted  by the goods  shed or 
sidings  or can be objected/disputed by them, in case of discrepancies. 
Further, there may be dues on account  of non -realization of dues within 
the month .  
During the check of Outstanding  Lists, it is to be seen that  
a) the admitted  debits  are correct and the same is cleared within the 
stipulated period as per codal  provisions.  
b) the objected/disputed debits  are correct and in case, it is contested by 
the goods  sheds  or sidings , the grounds of dispute has to ana lysed in 
detail and special  credits  afforded for withdrawing this credit  has to 
be checked for correctness.  
c) the outstanding  railway  dues under freight , demur rage and wharfage  
charges , siding charges , etc. are correct and the same is realized 
promptly.  
IV) Balance  Sheet : 
A monthly  Balance Sheet  is prepared manually by the Goods  
Sheds /Sidings  which gives the clear picture of the Goods Shed or Siding  
for a particular month . The preparation of monthly  Balance Sheet  in FOIS  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
74 
For internal use of IA&AD  is under progress. The Balance Sheet provides the information about the 
opening balance  of the outstandings under various heads at the beginning 
of the month  and then the various transactions made as debits  like freight , 
demurrage , wharfage  charges , etc. in the debit  side and the mode of 
realisation through various mea ns like cash , vouchers  through credit  
notes , e-payments, demand drafts, etc. and also the closing balance  of 
outstandings pending  realisation of railway  dues at the end of the month . 
The Balance Sheet is sent to the Traffic  Accounts  every month  with all 
supporting documents  like returns , accounts  foils of invoices, statements 
relating to demurrage, wharfage and other charges . 
During the check of Balance  Sheet , it is to be seen that:  
a) the debits  raised by Traffic  Accounts  are accounted in the Balance  
Sheet  by the Goods  Sheds /Sidings  with reference to Balance Advices 
(Advice  of Internal  Check ).  
b) the debits  during the month  in regard to freight , demurrage , wharfage  
and siding charges  accrued in the month  are a ccounted correctly in 
Balance  Sheet .  
c) the credits  during the month  in regard to cash  and vouchers  are 
accounted correctly in Balance  Sheet  with reference to Cash  Book, 
Cash Remittance  Notes , E-payment log, remittances to nominated 
banks.  
9.5.3  Apportionment  of earnings  
The apportionment  of earnings  is done through computerized  Centralized  
Apportionment  System  (CAS). In the case of goods  traffic , the share of each 
Zonal  Railway  is worked out in this software  and the net result of apportionment 
through apportionment matrix is advised to the concerned Zonal Railways . The 
apportionment of  passenger  earnings  is made on distance basis from the details 
in passenger  classification , while that relating to parcel  traffic  is carried out on 
percentage  proportion basis with reference to the paid parcel  cash book.  In regard 
to printed  card tickets , the same can be retained by the originating zonal railway , 
as it is minimal. The correctness of the apportionment is to be verified in 
accordance with the rules  in force.  
9.5.4  Out agencies  
The returns  submitted by out -agencies will be checked in the same wa y as those 
of stations .  In order, however, to verify the correctness of apportionment  of the 
earnings  from traffic  interchanged  between the railway  and the out -agencies, a 
test audit  should be carried out generally in the same manner as for worked lines.  
 
 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
75 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.5.5  Remission  of wharfage  and demurrage  charges  
The remiss ion of these charges  by the competent  authority  should not ordinarily 
be challenged in audit , but if such remissions are allowed on a very large scale or 
as a matter of cou rse or there are any other important features  a report may be 
made to the DAI . 
9.5.6  Compensation  for goods  lost 
The admissibility of the claim with reference to the contractual position 
(protection  afforded by risk  notes  etc.) and the evidence regarding loss  or damage  
should be scrutinized.  
9.5.7  Traffic  Book an d Accounts  Office  Balance  Sheet  
The correctness of the compilations should be checked to the extent laid  down.  
The reconciliation  of the figures with those in the General  Books  and the 
correctness of the amount shown under “Cash  in transit” should be looked into.  
In the case of the Accounts  Office  balance  sheet, a review should be conducte d 
especially of items not coming otherwise under test audit , in order to see if claim 
is promptly and correctly made and adequate action  is taken to keep unrealized 
earnings  at a minimum.  While arithmetical  checks  may be entrusted  to Sr. 
Auditors/Auditors, it is desirable that the review is carried out by or under the 
immediate supervision of a Branch  Officer, in order that the outstandings mi ght 
be examined critically and all relevant questions  taken up promptly.  
9.5.8  Refu nd lists and overcharges  sheets  
The possibilities of irregular payments and frauds should especially be b orne in 
mind.  It must be seen that entries in regard to refunds  are made in the abstracts 
or other suitable procedure exists in order to prevent the certification  of duplicate 
claims.  
9.5.9 Rate Circulars  and tariff changes  
A suitable percentage  should be checked to see that the maxima and minima rates 
laid down by the Government  of India  are not infringed without compe tent 
sanction.   
In order to check station -to-station and other special  rates for goods  traffic , where 
terminals  have not been separately specified, with reference to Governm ent 
maxima and minima, it is only necessary to see if such rates (without any 
deduction) are within the prescribed  maximum  of the class plus full terminals, 
short distance and other special  charges  applicable as notified in the tariff of the 
railway  concerned and are within the bare minimum of the class without any 
additional  charges . 
Grant  of concessions  either in the form of reduced rates for, or free  conveyance 
of particular classes of traffic  or particular persons, class or community are also 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
76 
For internal use of IA&AD  subjected to audit  with reference to the relevant or ders.  Where such concessions 
in particular cases are noticed during the check of station returns  the audit of such 
concessions should be done along with the check of the returns  concerned.  
Customary concessions may also be  reviewed from time  to time  and the necessity 
for their continuance and the adequacy of the rates charged examined.  
9.6 Appropriation  Accounts  
Appropriation  Accounts  detail the accounts  related to expenditure  of IR  for a 
particular year as compared to the appropriations  for different purposes as 
specified in the schedules appended to t he Appropriation Act  passed by 
Parliament . These Accounts list the original budget  allocation , supplementary 
grants, surrenders and re -appropriations distinctly and indicate the actual capita l 
and revenue expenditure  on various specified services vis -à-vis those authorized 
by the Appropriation Act in respect of both charged and voted items of budget. 
Appropriation Accounts thus facilitate  management  of finances and monitoring  
of budgetary  provisions and are therefore complementary to Finance  Accounts.  
The Appropriation  Accounts  of Indian  Railways  are prepared in two parts viz.  
Part I – Review – This deals with financial  results, changes in procedures, forms 
and classifications of accounts , review of receipts  and expenditure , Block  
account , Balance  Sheet  and different funds   
Part II – Detailed  Appropriation  Accounts  are prepared in the form of Grants  & 
Annexures:  
The Appropriation  Accounts  are prepared showing the Major  Head and Minor  
Head in Col.1, total Grant  or Appropriation in Col.2, Actual expenditure  in Col.3 
and the variation between the total Grant and the actual expenditure  viz. Excess 
(+) or Savings ( -) in Col.4. The total Grant is the sum of Original Grant (O) , 
Supplementary  Grant (S) and Residual  modification  (R) sanctioned  by the 
competent  authorities  other than the Parliament . Residual modification  is by re -
appropriation , surrender or withdrawal  within the Grant. The total Grant is the 
amount sanctioned  by the competent authority  before the close of the financial  
year.  The actual expenditure  entered in the Appropriation Accounts should agree 
with those shown in the annual  accounts  of the Railway  upto primary unit  level. 
Explanations for variation viz. excess/surrender under the Revenue and Capital 
head are to be frnished as per the guidelines issued by the Railway Board  from 
time to time for finalization of App ropriation Accounts15. 
9.6.1  Capital  & Revenue  Expenditure  
The two main components  of expenditure  in Indian  Railways  are: 
                                                           
15 Paras 2.2. and 3 of Annexure III to Railway Board 's letter No. 2020/APP/6 -1/2019 -20 dated 29 -04-2020  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
77 
For internal use of IA&AD  I) Reve nue expenditure  – includes ordinary working expenditure  and 
miscellaneous  expenditure .  This is financed through internal  resources  
generated by Indian  Railways  through its earnings  during the year.  
II) Plan expenditure - includes creation of new  assets , timely replac ement  and 
renewal  of depleted assets  which had outlived its usage, augmentation of 
network  capacity.  
III) After merger  of Railway  Budget  in General  Budget from 2017 -18, Indian  
Railways  is authorized for expenditure  through operation  of only Grant  
i.e. Grant No. 80 (2017 -18), Grant No. 82 (2018 -19 & 2019 -20) and Grant 
No. 83 (2020 -21) both for Capital  Major  Head 5002 and 5003 (erstwhile 
Grant No. 16) and Revenue   Major Head 3002 and 3003 SMH (Sub Major  
Head) 01 to 12 (erstwhile Grant  No. 03 to 14).  
9.6.2  Capital  Grant  
The Pink Book  in Railways  consists of the Railway  Board  sanctioned  Work, 
Machinery an d Rolling  Stock  Programme  of Railways that are undertaken or yet 
to be undertaken every year. The details of abstract cost  of the project, 
expenditure  incurred so far, funds a llotted during current  year and balance  outlay  
are indicated against each work  in this book. The plan expenditure  is financed 
from the general budgetary  sourc es, internal  resources  (Depreciation  reserve 
fund, Pension  fund, Development  fund, Capital  Fund , Railway safety  fund & 
RRSK ) and extra budgetary  support  i.e. market borrowing through Railway 
Finance  Corporation  Limited  for rolling stock  and new  network  lines by RVNL .  
The classification  of expenditure  on works  irrespective of whether they are 
charged to Capital , Fund , DRF , DF, RSF , RRSK , DSF  and EBR  (IF), Capital ‘N’ 
–Nirbhaya  Fund will come under Demand -16 namely Assets -Acquisition , 
Constructio n and Replacement. The Accounting Classification for works  
expenditure  is in the form of an eight -digit numerical  code. The first two digits 
indicate the source of fund. The second 2 digits will represent the Plan  head  
(Minor  head ). The subsequent 2 digits refer to the detailed head  of classification  
giving the details of the assets  acquired, constructed or replaced. The last two 
digits will indicate the primary unit  i.e., object of the expenditure . For the purpose 
of link with the accounts  of the Central  Gover nment  the Plan Heads will form the 
Minor Heads of Railway  Capital under the Major  Heads “5002 -Capital Outlay on 
Indian  Railways -Commercial  lines” and  “5003 -Capital Outlay on Indian 
Railways -Strategic lines.  
The minor Heads classifications are as follows:  
11 New  lines  
14 Gauge  conversion  
15 Doubling  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
78 
For internal use of IA&AD  16 Traffic  facilities  
17 Computerisation  
18 Railway  Research  
21 Rolling  Stock  
22 Leased Assets  – Payment of Capital  compon ent of lease charges  to 
IRFC  etc. 
29 Road  Safety  works  – Level Crossings  
30 Road  Safety  works  (ROB /RUB ) 
31 Track  Renewals  
32 Bridge  works  Tunnel Works  and Approaches  
33 Signalling  and Telecommunication  Works  
35 Electrification  projects  
36 Other Electrical  Works  including TRD Works  
37 Track  Distribution  
41 Machinery  and Plant  
42 Workshops  including  Production  Units  
51 Staff  Welfare  
52 Amenities  of Staff  
53 Passenger  & Other Railway  User’s Amenities  
61 Investment  in PSU /IV/SPV etc (Government  & Non  – Government)  
62 Investment  in Govt commercial  undertaking public undertaking  
63 Investments in Non - Govt undertaking including JVs/SPVs  
64 Other Specified works  
65 Training /HRD  
71 Stores  suspense  
72 Manufacturing Suspense  
73 Miscellaneous  Advances  
81 Metropolitan Transport  Projects  
82 Transfer  to Special  Railway  Safety  Fund  
83 New Lines (Construction) - Dividend free projects  
 
 The source of financing will be indicated in the following code:  
Capital  20 
DRF  21 
DF-I 23 
Capital  Fund  25 
RSF 26 
DF-II 33 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
79 
For internal use of IA&AD  DF-III 43 
DF-IV 53 
SRSF  27 
Capital  – Nirbhaya  Fund  28 
EBR -IF 84 
RRSK  29 
As the Plan  Heads of classification  coincide with the sub -heads of De mand  for 
Grant , the compilation  of budget  is also rendered easy and direct .  
9.6.3  Revenue  Grant  
Indian  Railways  operates 15 revenue grants which are functionally clubbed under 
six distinct groups as follows:  
S.No.  Group  No Name of demand  Nature of expenditure  booked  
I.   Policy  
Formulation and 
Services  
Common to all 
Railways    1.   Railway  Board    The expenditure  towards pay  
and allowances  of the 
Officers and other office 
expenses  of Railway  Board . 
2. MH 
3001   Miscellaneous  
Expenditure  
(General )   The expenditure  towards pay  
and allowances  and other 
office expenses  of Survey , 
RDSO , Audit , RRB  & RCT  
organizations  
II.   General  
Superintendence  
and Services  on 
Railways    3.SMH 01  General  
Superintendence  and 
Services  on 
Railways .   The expenditure  towards 
salary and  allowances  and 
office expenses  of Officers 
and staff  of various 
Departments  at Headquarters  
and Divisions . 
III. Repairs  and 
Mainte nance    4.  SMH 
02 Repairs  and 
Maintenance  of 
Permanent  Way and 
Works .   The expenditure  towards 
salary and allowances  and 
office  expenses  of Officers 
and administrative and 
technical  staff of Civil  
Engineering  Department  in 
open line  and workshops  
attending the work  of 
maintenance  and repair of 
permanent  way, bridges , 
buildings .  
5. SMH 03  Repairs  and 
Maintenance  of 
Motive  Power .   The expenditure  relating to 
salary and allowances  and 
office expenses  of Officers 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
80 
For internal use of IA&AD  and administrative and 
technical  staff of 
Mechanical  and Electrical  
Departments  in open line  
and workshops  attending 
the work  of repair and 
maintenance  of Diesel  and 
Electric  Locos  and other 
mechanical/electrical 
assets . 
6. SMH 04  Repairs  and 
Maintenance  of 
Carriages  and 
Wagons .   The expenditure  on pay  and 
allowance, office expenses  
and general charges  relating 
to the Officers and 
administrative and technical  
staff of Mechanical  and 
Electrical  Departments  in 
workshops  and sheds  
attending the work  relating to 
the repair and maintenance  of 
Carriages  and wagons . 
7. SMH 05  Repairs  and 
Maintenance  of 
plant and 
Equipment    The Expenditure  relating to 
the salary and office 
expenses  of Officers and 
administrative and technical  
staff of Civil , Mechanical , 
Electrical  and Signal  & 
Telecommunication  
Departments  in workshops  
and open line  attending the 
repairs  and maintenance  of 
various plant and equipment . 
IV. Operation      8.  SMH 
06 Operating  
Expenses -Rolling  
Stock  and 
Equipment .   Salary  and offices expenses  of 
Loco  drivers of Diesel , 
Electrical  and EMU , shed  
and yard  staff, Train  
Examiners etc. of 
Mechanical , Electrical and 
Signal  & 
Telecommunication  
Departments  in open line  are 
booked  
9. SMH 07  Operating  
Expenses -Traffic .   The pay  and allowances  and 
office expenses  of Officers 
and Staff  of Operating  and 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
81 
For internal use of IA&AD  Commercial  Department  
functioning at stations , yard , 
parcel  offices and Goods  
Sheds . 
10.  SMH 
08 Operating  
Expenses -Fuel.   The Pay  and al lowances  of 
officers and staff  Fuel 
Organization  including 
inspection  Cost of fuel viz. 
coal, Diesel  and electrical 
energy  for operation  of 
Passenger  and Goods  
services and other office 
expenses . 
V. Staff  Welfare , 
Retirement  
Benefits and 
Miscellaneous    11.  SMH 
09 Staff  Welfare  and 
Amenities . The expenditure  on the salary, 
office expenses  of Officers 
and Staff  of Railway  
Schools /Colleges, Hospitals, 
reimbursement  of tuition  fee, 
subsidy etc.  
12 SMH 
10 Miscellaneous  
Working Expenses.    The expenditure  relating to 
the Security , Claim s and 
Catering  Departments , 
compensations paid under 
Workmen  Act and ex -gratia 
payments.  
13.  SMH 
11 Provident  Fund , 
Pension  and other 
Retirement  
Benefits.    The expenditure  towards 
payment of various 
pensionary benefits like 
different kinds of pensions, 
gratuity, encashment  of leave  
etc. To be verified with 
reference to the budget  
allotment and actual 
expenditure  as per the 
Account  Current .  Applicable 
to Divisions , Workshop  and 
Establishment  Section /HQ. 
VI.   Railway  Funds  
and payment to 
General  
Revenues .   14. SMH 
12 Appropriation  to 
Funds .   The amounts appropri ated 
from Ordinary Revenue   to 
Depreciation  Reserve  Fund  
(DRF ) towards the cost  of 
replacement  and renewal  of 
all railway  assets , Pension  
Fund created to meet 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
82 
For internal use of IA&AD  expenditure  on various types 
of pension and amount 
appropriated after paying 
Dividend  to General  
Revenues  from Ordinary 
Revenue Development  Fund 
(DF)  viz .DF -I – to meet 
expenditure  on passenger  
welfare  works  and other 
Railway  user works , DF -II 
for labour  welfare works , 
DF-III-un-remunerative  
works  and DF -IV to meet 
expenditure  on safe  works  
other than ROB /RUB  and LC 
Gates . 
15. Dividend  to 
General  Revenues , 
Repayment 
of loans  taken from 
General Revenues 
and Amortization of 
over Capitalisation.    The Dividend  to General  
Revenues , Repayment of 
loans  taken from General 
Revenues and Amortization 
of Over  Capitalisation . 
(After merger  of Railway  
Budget  with G eneral  Budget 
Dividend  payable to General 
Revenues , does not arise)  
9.6.4  Subsidiary  Statements and Accounts  
The Appropriation  Accounts  should be supported by a Block  Account , Capital  
statement, a Balance  Sheet  and a Profit  and Loss Account of the railway . These 
statemen ts should be prepared separately for Commercial  and Strategic lines.  
9.6.5   Other A ccounts  & Subsidiary  Statements  
Other accounts  and subsidiary  statements, which s hould accompany the 
Appropriation  Accounts  of individual Railways  and Production  Units , are given 
below:  
I) Depreciation  Reserve  Fund  Account  (Annexure VII ) 
II) Development  Fund  Account  (Annexure VIII ) 
III) Pension  Fund  Account  (Annexure XI )  
IV) Stores  Account , Stock  Adjustment  Account , and Profit  and Loss Accounts  
of Catering  Depart ment  and Statement of outstanding  balances under 
suspense  (Annexure XI to XV )   
V) Annexure A - Statement of Expenditure  held under objection and not 
regularised by competent  authority . (Annexure XVI ) 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
83 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Annexure B  Statement of Undercharges detected by Accounts  or Audit  
and recovered. ( Annexure XVII )  
VII) Annexure C  Statement showing Remissions and Abandonment of Claims  
to Revenue . (Annexure XVIII ) 
VIII) Annexure D  Statement of' Expenditure  on Important Open  line works  and 
New  Constructions. ( Annexure XIX ) 
IX) Annexure E  Statement showing Revenue  and Capital  Expenditure  relating 
to Strategic Lines. ( Annexure XX ) 
X) Annexure F  Statement of estimated and actual credits  and recoveries . 
XI) Annexure H  (i) Statement of Losses, etc. ( Annexure XXII ) and (ii) 
Statement of Exgratia Payment.  
XII) Annexure I  Statement showing irregular Re -appropriations . (Annexure 
XXIII ) 
XIII) Annexure J  Statement of important misclassifications and other mistakes 
detected. ( Annexure XXIV ) -Figures to be given in Units  of rupees.  
XIV)  Anexure K - Statement of defects  in budgeting . 
The General  Mana ger of each railway  should send to the Railway  Board , the 
Appropriation  Accounts  for his railway  for the previous financial  year in Form 
No. F. 403,  furnishing the Statutory  Audit  with a copy thereof for check and 
certificat ion. 
9.6.6   Appropria tion Accounts  of Civil  Grants  
Every General  Manger should also furnish to the Railway  Board  so as to reach 
them by the appointed dates, advance copy of the Appropriation  Accounts  of the 
following Civil  Grants  in Form No. F.403  followed by the accounts  duly accepted 
in Audi t. 
I) Loans and Advances  bearing interest . 
II) Interest on debt, and other obligations and reductio n or avoidance of debt -
charged  
III) Pre-partition payments  
The figures of actual expenditure  as well as those of 
Grants /Appropriations  should be in units  of rupees.  
9.6.7   Debt Head  Report  
It is a part of Finance  Accounts. It consists of closing balance of the previous 
year, prior period adjustments  (i.e. TWFA), net receipts and disbursements  during 
the year and balances at the end of the year.  The “Debt Heads” and “Remittance  
Heads” is prepared after the closing of March accounts  by various units  at 
Divisional , Workshop  and Construction  level in the form ‘A’ 749 . The reports  
are then sent to the FA & CAO  for compilat ion from where it is submitted to 
Railway  Board . This report is called the Debt Head  Report. The report contains 
the outstanding  balances with explanations for important variations from the 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
84 
For internal use of IA&AD  previous year’s balances and comments  on the efficiency  of the balances at the 
end of the year under review. Following ‘Debt’ and ‘Remittance Heads’ are 
reviewed in the ‘Debt Head Report’: i ) ‘F’ Loan  and Advances  ii) ‘I’ Small 
savings. iii) ‘J’ Reserve  Funds . iv) ‘K’ Deposits  and Advances. v) ‘M’ 
Remittances  - Adjustment  Accoun ts with Postal  Department  and Defence  
Department. vi) PAO Suspense  and AG Suspense.  
In addition, the following information is also furnished in respect of Deposit  
Miscellaneous : (a) Opening balance  as on Ist April, receipts  and disbursements  
during the year and closing balances on 31st March under each classified  heads 
of Indian  Railway  Deposits , (b) Receipts and Disbursements during the year 
under ‘Cash ’. The report is based on an analysis  of various balances enumerated 
above. The report , besides reviewing outstanding  balances, furnishes 
explanations for major  variations form the previous year’s balances and 
comments  on the efficiency  of the balances at the end of the y ear under review. 
Certificates are furnished by the concerned in regard that the balance  shown in 
the report agrees with the General  books  and are supported by details. A copy of 
the report furnished to Audit  for certification  is scrutinized and acceptance of the 
report communicated.  
9.6.8  Block  Accounts   
The Appropriation  Accounts  should be supported by a Statement called Block  
Account . The Block Account represents all the physical  assets  of the railway  
whether financed from capital or the Railways ’ own generation of funds. The 
Block A ccount is maintained separately for commercial  and strategic  lines and 
includes the assets  created out of Capital  Account, Development  Fund , 
Depreciation  Reserve  Fund, Railway  Safety  fund Special  Railway Safety Fund 
and EBR  (IF), Capital ‘N’ –Nirbhaya  Fund . 
9.7  Maintenance  of General  Books  and Compilation of Accounts   
Accounting transactions fall under two distinct headings, viz  
I) Cash  receipts and disbursements  and 
II) Book adjustments  
Initial records maintained in Accounts  Office  
I) for cash  transaction -- a cash voucher or bill  
II) for book adjustment —a journal  slip 
Cash  transactions are entered in Cash book while Jo urnal  slip are entered in 
Journal.  
Essential records maintained by the Accounts  Office for compiling the 
monthly  and annual accounts are called as General  Books  (Chapter 3 of 
Accounts Code - I) 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
85 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.7.1  General  Books  
For the purpose of collecting and bringing to account the transact ions of an 
accounts circle and for compiling the monthly  and annual accounts, the Accounts  
Officer is required to maintain certain essential records which for brevity are 
called `General  Books'  comprising of : - 
I) The Daily  Abstract  of Cash  Transaction or the General  Cash Book, Form 
No. A 304  
II) The Monthly  Classified Abstract  of Cash  Transactions or the General  
Cash Abstract Book, Form No. A 306  
III) The Journal , Form No. A 307 
IV) The Ledger , Form No. A 310 
Two sets of Journals  and Ledgers  are maintained for Revenue  and other for 
Capital  Accounts  since separate Accounts are maintained for these two classes of 
transactions. Only one  Daily  Abstract  of Cash  Transaction (General  Cash Book) 
and Monthly  Classified Abstract of Cash  Transactions need to be maintained for 
subsidiary  to Revenue Ledger . 
I) Daily  Abstract  of Cash  Transaction (General  Cash Book ) 
In scrutinising the general cash  book, the transaction should be checked 
as follows: - 
a) It is maintained in a proper format (A 304) and posted daily (A 305). 
b) It is balanced daily and balance reconciled with that in the Cashiers 
Cash  Book (A 1917 ). 
c) The debit  side of the General  Cash  Book should record all the cash  
received from station remittances [(from Cash check sheets  (A1943) ], 
cheques  drawn on Banks  [(from the Requisition for Cheques ( A1111 )] 
receipts from miscellaneous items(from the counter foil of the Cash 
receipts granted), re coveries made from bills  passed for payment 
(recorded from the various credit  heads of accounts as abstracted in 
Form A 1109 , unpaid amounts remitted by Cashier  (A1957 ). 
d) The credit  side of the General  Cash  Book should record all remittance  
into Bank (From Bank remittance receipts ( A1942 ) payments made 
from the various credit heads of accounts as abstracted in Form A1109  
e) Cashie r's Cash  Book --(See also paragraphs 1917 —1918 -AI). This 
should be checked at the time of checking the general cash  book. It 
should be verified that all receipts have been paid in full and promptly 
into the Reserve  Bank or Government  Treasury  and that cash balances 
have been kept down to a minimum. It shoul d particularly be seen that 
the statements from Banks  and Treasuries referred to in para. 432--AI 
have been duly received and verifi ed by the Accounts  Department.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
86 
For internal use of IA&AD  While auditing  the cash  check sheets  it should be seen that cheques  
received in payment of railway freight and fares, have been sent for 
collection immediately on receipt , the fact that the rules  laid down by 
the Railway  Board  on the subject are strictly followed should be 
verified. In the event of such cheques being dishonored by the bank  
on presentation the fact has to be intimated to the party concerned. It 
should be seen that the Railways  do not accept any liability for loss or 
damage, if any, due to delay in intimating that the cheque has been 
dishonor ed. 1908 and 1909 AI . 
II) The Monthly  Classified Abstract  of Cash  Transactions or the General  
Cash Abstract Book  
It is posted daily from the totals in Daily  Abstract  of Cash  Transaction.  It 
is kept in two parts one part for receipts (debits ) and the other for 
disbursements  (credits ). It should be totalled after the transactions of the 
last of the month have been posted  
III) Journal  
These are prepared for adjusting Revenue  and Capital  heads from the 
Journ al slips or Vouchers. One head is debited and another head is 
credited.  
IV) Ledger  
The closing totals of the journal  are posted in the Ledger  in the various 
heads of account so that it records all receipts and charges of the 
accounting circle, under the various heads of account, and also shows the 
progressive  balances under those heads, the end of each accounting 
period.  
V) Subsidiary Accounts  Records . 
In addition t o the General  Books  the following subsidiary  records should 
be kept by each accounting circle: - (i) Registers of Earnings  (A-313). (ii) 
Revenue  Allocation  Registers (A -312). (iii) Registers o f Works  (E-1473). 
(iv) Suspense  Registers   (A -320). (v) Register  of works expenditure  
classified under Capital , Depreciation Reserve  Fund , Development  Fund, 
etc 
VI) Suspense  Registers.  - 
  These registers  reflect transactions which canno t immediately be charged 
to final heads. Rules  relating to the maintenance of detailed registers for 
recording the transactions pertaining to the suspense  heads under "Stores " 
and "Workshop  manufacture Suspense " are laid down in the departmental 
codes concerned. Rules relating to the maintenance of the following 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
87 
For internal use of IA&AD  detailed registers for the heads of account operated in accounting sections 
and offices are prescribed in paragraphs A315 to A321. (i) Demands 
Payable  Register . (ii) Miscellaneous  Advances Register. (i ii) F. Loans and 
Advances Register. (iv)Deposits  Unpaid Wages Register. (v) Deposits 
miscellaneous Register.  
VII)    Other Suspense  Registers . 
Separate registers  for Miscellaneous  Advances (Capital ), Miscellaneous 
Advances (Revenue ), Loans and Advances to Government  servants and 
Deposits  Miscellaneous  
9.8  Compilation of Important Accounts  
1) Account Cu rrent  
Account Current  is simply a statement showing receipts and 
disbursements  of accounts circle duly classified under prescribed head of 
accounts [Appendices XI (for Revenue  Accounts ) and XII ( for Capital  
Accounts) of Accounts Code Part I. This is prepared monthly  and finally 
an annual combined Capital and Revenue Accounts is also prepared.  
It is prepared on the principle  that all entries in Accounts  Current should 
be shown in net i.e. after the deduction of the write back  adjustments , 
against each head of Account.  
After the General  Books  for a month are closed and Ledgers  written up 
the monthly  Account Current  is prepared for Capital  and Revenue  
transactions from the ledgers.  
As per the Revised  norms, a combined Account Current  is prepared 
although the Revenue  and Capital  portions/ Schedules are shown 
separately.  
After the Books  for a financial  year a re closed, Final Account Current  of 
Capital  and Revenue  transactions of the Railway  are prepared in the same 
manner as monthly  Account Current. This Account Current int ends to 
show the transactions of the Railway for the year under the various final 
heads of account and the opening and closing balances under the suspense  
and debt heads.  
II) Check of monthly  accounts - 
The postings of journal  vouchers (slips) into the journal should be verified 
as prescribed. It should also be seen that all the journal slips so traced 
have been scrutinised in audit. (See paragraphs 307--309--A). 
The ledger should be checked to see that the grand totals in the journals  
have been correctly posted in them and that the closing entries have been 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
88 
For internal use of IA&AD  correctly made. (See Paragraph s 310--A). In checking the monthly  
account currents, the entries in the column "current month" and the 
schedules of receipt  and expenditure  should be checked with the ledgers. 
The opening balance should be compared with the closing balance of the 
previous month's account, and the closing balance with the general cash  
book. The debits  and credits  to the head `Reserve  Bank Deposits ' 
(Railways ) and the various Deposit  and Remittance  heads connected with 
the same as shown in t he account current should be compared with the 
details in the schedule of transactions under Reserve Bank Deposits. It 
should also be seen that the prescribed schedules have been correctly 
prepared and that their totals agree with the respective entries in  the 
account current. (See Paragraphs 323--346--A). 
III) Capital  and Revenue  Accounts  
It reflects the Railway  finance in commercial  terms. The Capital  
expenditure  are compiled from the Ledger  and Register  of Capital, DRF, 
DF, etc. The Revenue  expenditure are compiled from the Revenue 
Allocation  Register. The Earnings  are compiled from the Register of 
Earnings.  
It should be checked with the total to -date column of the detailed 
expenditure  schedules  attached to the capital account current for March. 
It should be seen that the expenditure is shown in net, i.e., after deducting 
receipts on capital account and that all credit  entries due to special 
adjustments , etc., are explained in footnotes. The expenditure on final 
heads should be checked with statement VI and the Capital  Ledgers  
The earnings  and expenditure  under the various heads shou ld be checked 
with the revenue account current for March and its schedules. The detailed 
expenditure under the various abstracts should be checked with the 
revenue allocation  registers . The details of earnings under the  various 
abstracts should be checked with the respective registers maintained in 
the Traffic  Accounts  Branch. The statement of outstanding earnings (A. 
716) should be checked with the Station  Balance  Sheets as regards station 
outstanding and with the Accounts Office Balance Sheet  and register of 
bills recoverable  as regards other outstanding.  
IV)  Finance  Accounts  
It is prepared in accordance with the requirements of Governments 
Accounts  duly classified in accordance with the heads of Accounts 
prescribed for Government  Accounting (Appendix  IV of Accounts Code 
I). 
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
89 
For internal use of IA&AD  9.9 Audit  of Appropriation  Accounts  
Appropriation  Audit  is directed primarily to ascertain that the money expended 
has been applied to the purpose or purposes for whi ch the Grant  or Appropriation 
were intended to provide and the amount of expenditure  against each Grant or 
Appropriation does not exceed the amount authorized  (Paras  2.13 to 2.88, 2.134 
to 2.156, 5.2 to 5.5, 5.15 to 5.22 and Chapters 8 to 13 of Financial  Attest  Audit 
Manual ). 
The following aspects need to be kept in mind while examination of various 
statements, and annexure submitted by Accounts  for verification  and 
certification . 
I) To examine the explanation of vari ations and to secure amplifications and 
modifications  and variations where required.  
II) The accuracy of figures in the Appropriation  Accounts  should be verified 
with IPAS  data/initial a ccounts records.   
III) Issue  of Completeness/Recognition/Authority  – Completeness means that  
all expenditure  relevant to the year of account  have been recognized  and 
recorded . 
IV) Railway  Administrations are required to explain the Net variations 
(excess/ savings) between total sanctioned  Grant / Appropriation  (original 
plus supplementary Grant/ Appropriation) a nd actual expenditure . 
V) The figures appearing in the demand for grants for original and 
supplementary may be checked with respect to their correctness.  
VI) The actual expenditure  for each accounting sub unit  under the zone should 
be verified from subsidiary  records such as Revenue  Allocation  Register  
and Capital  Works  Register for each sub head . 
VII) The figures of the Zonal  Railways  should be consolidated from each of 
the base accounting units  and verified for their completeness. The impact  
of correction slips issued after closure of accounts  should also be 
incorporated.  
VIII) It should be ensured that all the orders of appropriation  or re-appropriation  
are issued before the close of financial  year. There can be no re –
appropriation across the various grants. However, in the capital  grant  – 
grant no. 16, re -appropriation across various Funds  is also not 
permissible.  
IX) It should be checked that all excesses under the sub head  have been 
covered  through permissible re -appropriation . 
X) Irregular appropriation  not in accordance with restrictions imposed on the 
General  Manager 's power  should be commented.  
XI) Defective  estimation leading to surrender of funds or requirement for 
additional  funds may be brought to notice.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
90 
For internal use of IA&AD  XII) In pursuance of codal  provisions, IR  is to provide for contribution  to the 
Pension  Fund  on the basis of Actuarial Valuation. This may be 
commented upon.  
XIII) The paid vouchers  pertaining to the period after 31st March i.e. close of 
the financial  year particularly April, May and June may be thoroughly 
examined to see whether these actually pertained to the period prior to 
31st March and that their payments have not been delayed for reasons 
such as paucity of funds, or as a manipulative mechanism  for improving 
the Operating  Ratio (by showing less expenditure ). Thus the expenditure  
of a year deferred for payment would involve understatement of rev enue 
grants and would have a corresponding impact  on operating ratio .  
All these functions  on behalf of PDA  are carried out by the Senior  Divisional  
Audit  Officers/ Divisional Audit Officers/ Senior Audit Officers/Audit Officers 
who are expected to incorporate results of their Audit in the form of comments  
tothe appropriation  accounts .  
9.10 Resul ts of Audit  of Appropriation  Accounts  
The results of audit  of appropriation  accounts  on the lines given above are 
included in Annexure J  and Annexure K  to the appropriation  accounts  for that 
accounting year.  
Annexure –J:  This is a Statement of misclassification and mistakes in 
accounting.  
I) Misclassification : Includes cases of booking  of expenditure  of one 
revenue grant  to another revenue Grant , one source fund to another fund 
in works  expenditure , one mino r head  to another minor head  in works  
grant etc.  
II) Mistake in accounting : Includes wrong allocation  of primary unit , 
subhead, minor head , reduction of expenditure  booked as credit / 
recoveries , recovery of payment of salary booked as credit / recoveries, 
recoveries of penalty  accounted as revenue, treating the capital  
expenditur e into revenue expenditure  or vice versa, a accounting of 
previous year’s revenue debit /credit in the current  year, non -accounting 
of debit/credit to the closed work  for whic h completion  report was  
sanctioned , non -clearance of misc. advance payments in the same year, 
revenue credits  to be accounted for as “Deduction/reduction in 
expenditure ” shown as Mi sc. earnings  etc. Instances of 
misclassification/mistakes noticed during the central  audit  and inspection  
should be noted in a separate register  and the  action  taken for rectification 
of the same to be watched. If the mistakes / mis -classifications  were not 
rectified even after pointing out by Audit  such items are to be included in 
the Annexure -J to the Appropriation  Accounts  for that Accounting year.  
Chapter 3 – Audi t of Accounts Department  
 
91 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure K  is a Statement showing defects  in budgeting. Cases of excess 
over budget , savings, non -utilization of budget, non -surrender of budget, 
withholding the payment on account  of budget are defective budgeting. 
Explanations given for variations (Excess/Savings) over allotment of 
funds and actual expenditure  under various Gr ants to be analyzed and 
defects  noticed to be brought to notice of the Accounts  Office  for 
inclusion in the statement. Instances of variations noticed during the 
central  and loc al audit  should also be noted in a separate register  and after 
check of the revenue and works  grants, the inclusion of the items to be 
decided.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
92 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
93 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHA PTER 4  - AUDIT OF PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
The Personnel  Department  in Railways  is responsible for looking after P olicy  
Formulation and Rules  and Regulations  for Personnel Management , 
Establishment  related works , Welfare  Activities , and matters related to Industrial  
relations.  
The department deals with Recruitment , Training , Promotions, Transfers, 
Selections, Creation  and Abolition of Posts , Grant ing Retirement  Benefits, 
Disbursement of Pay  and Allowances , Productivity  Linked Bonus , Maintenance  
of Service  Record and Leave  Records  of Non -Gazetted  staff other than Railway  
Protection  Force  (RPF ) and Accounts  Department . The department also deals 
with Recognized Unions and arranges Permanent  Negotiating Machinery  (PNM ) 
and Participation of Railway Employees  in management  (PREM ) meetings for 
settlement of staff  grievances . The department also deals with provisions and 
various laws  and acts promulgated by the Government  of India  from time  to time  
such as Industrial  Disputes Act , Factories  Act, Workmen ’s Compensation  Act, 
Disciplinary, Appeal  Rules  and Railway S ervant Service Conduct Rules etc.  
The Personnel  Department  is the custodian of all Establishment  Rules  and 
Regulations  and their interpretation in Service  Matters. Many welfare  activities 
like running  of Staff  Canteen, Holiday  Homes, Consumer  Cooperative Societies , 
Railway  Schools  and Institutes  are also undertaken by the Personnel Department.  
2. ORGANIZATION HIERARCHY  OF PERSONNEL 
DEPARTMENT  
The Personnel  Department  at Railway  Board  is headed by Director  General  (HR) 
who is assisted by Additional  Member  (Staff ), Principal  Executive  Director 
(Training and MPP) and Legal  Advisor . 
Minister  of Railways  
 
Minister  of State for Railways   
 
Chairman  Railway  Board  & Chief  Executive  Officer (CEO ) – CRB  
 
DG/HR  
 
 
         AM/Staff      PED  (Trg & MPP)          Legal  Advisor   

Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
94 
For internal use of IA&AD  At Zonal  level the Personnel  Department  is headed by Principal  Chief  Personnel 
Officer (PCPO ) duly assisted by Chief Personnel Officers (CPO ), Dy.  Chief 
Personnel Officers (Dy. CPO ), Sr. Personnel Officers (SPO ) and Assistant  
Personnel Officers (APO ).  
At Divisional /Field level there are Sr. Divisional Personnel  Officers (Sr. DPO), 
Divisional Personnel Officer (DPO)/ Assistant  Personnel Officer (APO ). 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1 At Railway  Board  level  
I) Framing/Inte rpretation of Rules . 
II) Policy  and Procedure  relating to Labour  Relations  and Labour Laws.  
III) All establishment matters relating to Territorial Army of the Railways . 
IV) Policy  relating to Staff  Welfare  such as Education , Railway  Schools , 
Passes  and PTOs, Staff Benefit  Fund , Welfare Am enities  like Canteen, 
Holiday  Homes etc.  
V) Policy  on Discipline and Appeal  Rules  and Railway  Services  Conduct 
Rules.  
VI) Formation of Pay  Commission  Cell.  
3.2 At Zonal  level/Divisional /Field level  
I) Recruitment , Training , Promotion  and Appointment  to various cadres.  
II) Ensurin g implementation  of all policies on establishment matters over the 
Zone.  
III) Ensuring proper Man Power  Planning , Staff  Welfare , Industrial  Relations , 
Staff Grievances  and Court  Cases.  
IV) Preparation  of Salary  Bills  other than RPF  and Accounts  Department . 
V) Maintenance  of Service  Record and Leave  Accounts  of Non -gazetted  
staff (other than RPF  and Accounts Department ). 
VI) Interpretation of rules  and issue  of Policy  Circulars . 
VII) Working of Railway  Recruitment  Cell (RRC ) (for zonal level only).  
VIII) Efficient  Running  of Holiday  Homes, Railway  Schools  and Staff  
Canteens.  
IX) Implementation of Hours  of Employment  Regulations . 
X) Policy  matters relating to Cooperative Societies . 
XI) Allotment  of Railway  accommodation (for zonal level only).  
XII) Staff  Benefit  Fund . 
XIII) Creation , Abolition and Surrender of NG posts .  
XIV)  Re-engagement  of Retired Personnel . 
XV) Re-deployment of medically de -categorized staff16 
                                                           
16 Chapter -13 of IREM  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
95 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVI)  Issue of pases  
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
Level of Unit  Main Activity  Allied/ Sub -activi ty 
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Man Power  
Planning  Manpower  Planning  – 
Creation ,  
abolition ,  
transfer of posts ,  
cadre  review.  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Recruitment   Direct  Appointments  (for 
Group  ‘A’ RB  level only)  
Compassionat e Appointments  
Appointment  against Sports  
Quota  
Substitutes  
Re-engagement  of retired  
railway  servants  
Re-deployment of medically 
de-categorized staff17 
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Training  and 
development  To organise various trainings 
such as initial training , 
refresher training , 
promotional training  and  
Special  professional training . 
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Salary , Allowances  
and Sanctions  Payroll -Wage,  
salary,  
annual  increment ,  
pay fixation ,  
allowances ,  
recovery,  
sanctions  related to 
establishment.  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Transfers and 
Postings  Transfers and Postings in 
various circumstances  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Performance  
Apprais al Review of APARs  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Employee services 
and benefits  Leave  
Railway  Passes  and PTOs  
                                                           
17 Chapter -13 IREM  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
96 
For internal use of IA&AD  Payment under Employee’s 
Compensation  Act, 1923  
Hours  of Employment  
Regulations  (HOER ) 
Issue of UMID cards18 
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Promotions and 
Demotions  
 Regular  and ad -hoc promotions 
including Modified  Assured 
Career  Progression Scheme  
(MACPS ) 
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Disciplinary m atters  
 Minor  Penalties   
Major  Penalties  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Settling Industrial  
Disputes  
 Permanent  Negotiatio n 
Machinery  (PNM )  
Joint  Consultative  Machinery  
(JCM)  
Participation of Railway  
Employees  in Management  
(PREM ) 
Legal  Cell (Railway  Board  
only)  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Incentives and 
Financial  aids 
 Productivity  Linked Bonus  
Advances  to Railway  servants -  
House  Building Advance  
(HBA )  
Computer  Advance   
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Setting up and 
maintenance  of 
Welfare  Activities  Staff  Benefit  Fund  (SBF)  
Allotment  of railway  quarters  
(except RB ), Co-operative  
Societies  
Other staff  welfare  activities  
RB, Apex  and 
field units  Pension , Po st 
retirement  benefits 
and Grievance  
Redressal  of 
Pensioners  
 Superannuation  pension  
Retiring  pension  
Invalid pension  
Compensation  pension  
Compulsory retirement  pension  
Compassionate  allowance  
Family  pension  
Commutation  of pension  
                                                           
18 RB’s letter No. 2018/Trans. Cell/Health/ Medical  Cards dated 08.06.2018 and 2018/Trans. Cell/Health/Medical 
Card dated 04.01.2019  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
97 
For internal use of IA&AD  Retirement  gratuity or death 
gratuity  
Grievances  redressal of 
pensioners  
Exgratia payments19 
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS  
The risk  analy sis of the Personnel  Department  should be done on following 
parameters  
I) Quantum  of Recruitment  and Appointments  
II) Number of promotion  in a year  
III) Number of disciplinary cases - finalized and pending . 
IV) Employee Grievances  received  
V) Revision  of pay  etc. due to pay  commission report and cadre  restructuring 
etc. 
VI) When last audited  viz. Audited  last one year/ three year/ five ye ar/ more 
than five year/ never audited . 
VII) Audit  perception based on Newspaper  reports , Parliamentary  questions , 
RTIs, complaints  lodged  etc. 
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railway  embarked on a speed  work  of switching over to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and has implemented various IT applications  in the 
last few years. At present Accounting Information  Management  System  (AIMS ), 
NIVARAN , Railway Employee Sel f Service  (RESS ), Human Resource 
Management System (HRMS) , ARPAN  and Unique Medical  Identification  
(UMID ) are the IT applications  being used  by the Personnel  Department  from 
which the detailed information can be extracted for exercising audit  checks  as 
stated against each items above.  
6.1 Accounting Information  Management  System  (AIMS ) 
AIMS  is a Web Based application  which covers Establishment , Pay  Roll, Leave  
Account , PF, Pension  and other important modules  being dealt by Personnel  
Department  and also facilitates internal  checks , bill passing, cheque writing, 
Mon thly and Annual  account  compilation , budget  and financial  review and 
forecast  being dealt by Finance  Department.  
 
 
                                                           
19 RB letter.No. E(W)2016/EG -1/4 dated 25.11.2016  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
98 
For internal use of IA&AD  Modules available in AIMS  are listed below - 
I) Human  Resource  
a) Employee Profile  
It contains particulars relating to Bio -data, family  details, email, 
Aadhar Number, etc.  
b) Pay Roll 
Containing field such a s Pay  and allowances , Increment , Income  Tax, 
Travelling  Allowance , Bonus , Arrears, supplementary Pay sheet, 
change card, Quarters , electricity, Provident  Fund , REGIS , etc.  
c) Service  record  
Service  record containing details of transfers and postings, 
regularization, promotions, change in servi ce status, confirmations, 
etc. 
d) Leave  
Containing details of leave  balance , posting of leave , special  leave , 
cancellation  of leave  and leave  debit  entry.  
e) Settlement  
It contains Pension  detail and Pension bills  viz. Leave /GIS  bill, GIS 
entry, Gratuity  bill, Arrears, Bill  revision , etc.  
f) Cadre  
Contain  sanctioned  posts . 
g) Loans and Advances  
It contains processing of loans , recovery of principal amount as w ell 
as interest . 
Reports  generated by Human  Resource module  are given in Annexure 
‘A’ which may be referred to during audits.  
II Finance  
a) Internal  check  
b) Books  
c) PF 
d) Pension  
e) Cash  and Pay  
f) Suspense  
g) Budget  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
99 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.2 NIVARAN  
NIVARAN  is a web  based portal  for redressal of grievan ces of serving as well as 
retired  employees . Access  to the portal  is given to the identified authorities  at 
three levels viz. Railway  Board (Tier  1) Zonal  Railway/ PUs  (Tier 2)  
Divisional  and extra divisional  offices (Tier 3). The time  period of maximum  of 
60 da ys is fixed  for redressal of the grievance. Action is required to be taken by 
the ‘Admin’s’ representative within 48 hours of registration  of the grievance. The 
case should either be forwarded to the concerned authority  or the course of action  
to be followed is required to be recorded on the portal . On closure of the grievance 
the complainant is given a period of 45 days for Appeal  (RB’s letter No. 
2016/ED /ERP/NIVARAN II dated 25.07.2016  and NIVARAN portal  
http://nivaran.railnet .gov.in/nivaran/FAQ.seam ).  
6.3 Railway  Employee Self Service  (RESS ) 
An Employee gets access to his/her financial  and personal da ta through this 
portal . Employee must register  to the site  
https://aims.indianrailways.gov.in/IPAS  to view their Personal  details, Salary , 
PF, Income  Tax Projections and to download Pay  Slips.  
6.4 Human  Resource Management  (HRMS)  
HRMS is being developed and implemented all across Indian  Railways  as a part 
of the digitalization of the entire details pertaining to the employees  and to bring 
all employees  related matters under one application  by integrating t he various 
existing packages such as IPAS , REIS, AIMS  etc. (RB ’s letter No. 
ERP/2018/HRMS/CRIS /MoUPt.I dated 12.07.2019)  
This will involve the following - 
I) Electronic  Service  Records  and employee self -service  access.  
II) Cadre  management , leave  and salary administration on real time  basis.  
III) Complete electronic  application  and processing of loans  and advances  as 
well as settlement papers.  
IV) Maintaining record of APARs as well as trainings undergone by the 
employees . Making such data accessible for review at all levels. (Action 
Plan for five years) . 
6.5 Unique Medical  Identification  (UMID ) 
This facility has been introduced for bringing uniformity in the medical  identity 
cards  issued to employees  and other beneficiaries on Indian  Railways . The UMID  
Software  has been developed by South  Central  Railway  (SCR) and the SCR is 
responsible for maintenance  of UMID System  for pan India . 
Under  UMID , the medical  cards  would be plastic based cards  following separate 
color strips for identifying serving and retired  employees  and the dependents - 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
100 
For internal use of IA&AD  Beneficiaries  Color code  
Serving Railways  employees   Blue strip at Top and Bo ttom 
Pensioners  Green strip at Top and Bottom  
Medical  beneficiary of serving 
employee  Blue strip at Top and Yellow at 
Bottom  
Medical  beneficiary of Retired 
employee  Green strip at Top and Yellow at 
Bottom  
The medical  card will have 12 digits alpha numeric Unique All India  Number and 
would also contain the level of entitlement of employee indicating the level of 
facilities to be provided to the beneficiary. The medical cards  for beneficiaries  up 
to the age of 15 years would be valid for five years, after which it would be 
renewed. For beneficiaries above 15 years the medical cards  would be renewed 
on attaining the age of 40 years and at the time  of retir ement . This card would be 
reissued on change of level of entitlement. ( RB’s letter No. 20 18/Trans. 
Cell/Health / Medical  Cards dated 08.06.2018  and 2018/Trans. 
Cell/Health/Me dical Card  dated 04.01.2019 ) 
7. AUDIT FOCUS AREA – CHECK LIST  
7.1 Man Power  Planning  
Manpower  planning  includes various sub -activities relating to creation of posts  
including supernumerary  posts, identification of surplus  posts, abolition  and 
transfer of posts, review of cadre , assessment of vacancies  etc. While the 
manpower planning  for Group  ‘A’ posts is done at Railway  Boards level, the 
same is done at the Zonal  level for the remaining Groups of posts (viz. Group 
‘B’, ‘C’ and Group ‘C’ MTS ).    
7.1.1 Cadre  Management  
The strength  including the number and character of post  of the Railway  Services  
for Group  ‘A’ and ‘B’ is determined by the Railway Board . The General  
Managers  of Indian  Railways  have the powers to create gazetted  posts  in Group 
‘A’ and Group ‘B’, only to the extent stipulated in Item (3) of Annexure II of 
Chapter V of Indian Railway Financial  Code  Vol. I  (First Edition 1982) subject 
to such limits and instruc tions  as may be laid  down by the Railway Ministry  from 
time to time .     (Para 110 R -I) 
In the Railway  Board  and attached offices - The number and character of 
Group  C & Group C MTS  posts  in the office of the Railway Board  and other 
offices, projects, organizations , immediately under its control shall be such as 
may be determined by the Railway Board. The Director  General , Research , 
Designs  and Standards  Organisation  or any other authority to whom the powers 
may be specifically delegated by the Railway Board may create temporary posts 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
101 
For internal use of IA&AD  on the conditions prescribed in their respective schedul es of power. ( Para 119      
R-I) 
On Railways , Production  Units or other Establishments - The number and 
character of Group  C & Group C MTS  posts  may be determined by the General  
Managers or the authority to whom such powers are delegated, provided that the 
prior sanction of the Railway  Ministry  is necessary for the introduction of a new 
category not already obtaining on a Railway. ( Para 120 R -I) 
During Audit  of Cadre /Scale  check, it should be seen whether – 
(Para 1319 to 1323  and 1408 to 1414  (A-I))     
I) Registers in form A .1319  and 1407  are being maintained in the Account  
Office for the purpose of cadre  check.    
II) Appointments  are not made in any grade or class of Railway  Service  in 
excess of the sanctioned  number of posts . 
III) No post  is filled or held in abeyance without the orders of competent  
authority . 
IV) The staff  are not engaged on temporary posts  beyond the period of their 
currency . 
7.2 Recruitment  
The normal recruitment  is determined with reference to the sanctioned  strength  
of a service  or department. When, however, the total actual strength  of a service  
is in excess of or below th e total sanctioned  strength , recruitment  would be so 
adjusted as to enable the total sanctioned  strength  to be worked compatible with 
the avoidance of shortage on t he one hand  and excesses on the other. ( Para 204 
R-I) 
The principal modes and agencies of recruitme nt on Indian  Railways  are as 
under - 
I) Union  Public  Service  Commission  for Group  ‘A’ Services  
II) Railway  Recruitment  Board  for Group  ‘C’ 
III) Railway  Recruitment  Cell for Group  ‘C’ MTS  
IV) Screening of Substitutes   
V) Appointment  on compassionate  grounds  
VI) Appointment  against sports quota  
VII) Appointment  on the grounds of cultural and artistic talents  
VIII) Appointment  of physically handicappe d persons through RRB  & RRC . 
IX) Appointment against Scouts and Guide Quo ta 
The recruitment  of officials in various Group  is done by the following agencies - 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
102 
For internal use of IA&AD  Group  ‘A’  Done by Union  Public  Selection  Commission  through All 
India  Competitive Examination  and Interview. Besides, 
this indirect  recruitment  throu gh promotions of eligible 
Group  ‘B’ officers.  
Group  ‘B’ Filled by promotion  from serving Group  ‘C’ candidates.  
Group  ‘C’ Done by Railway  Recruitment  Boards (RRBs) - Both for 
technical  and non -technical posts . Besides, this indirect  
recruitment  through promotions of eligible Group  ‘C’ 
officials.  
Group  ‘C’ 
MTS  Done by Railway  Recruitment  Cells (RRCs) also 
undertake recruitment  under Physically Handicapped 
Quota  and also process recruitment  through Sport s Quota, 
Scouts & Guides Quota , Recruitment of Act Apprentice  as 
well as Cultural Quota.   
(Chapter -2 R-I) 
7.2.1  Railway  Recruitment  Board  (RRB ) 
To cater the needs for recruitment  of Group  ‘C’ staff , Railway  Board  have setup 
21 Rai lway Recruitment  Boards over Indian  Railways . All Group ‘C’ 
recruitments are conducted by RRBs except recruitments made by Zonal  
Railways  and Production  Units  viz. appointment  of compassionate  ground , 
appointment against cultural and scout quota etc. ( Para-109 IREM  Vol. I )  
Railway  Recruitment  Boards are placed under the control  of Chairman  who is 
assisted by members and a Secretary .  
The main functions  of RRBs are to – 
I) Scrutinize  indents  received from zonal railways and production  units  and 
arran ge for publication of vacancies  in leading newspaper  and on website.  
II) Contact  specialists  for setting question paper.  
III) Arrange venue for organizing examination,  
IV) contact Railway  Officials  for arranging Personnel  for supervision,  
V) Frame  result and send the list of successful candidates along with required 
documents  to Zonal  Railways .   
During audit  of RRBs, besi des other establishment checks  given under Railway  
Recruitment  Board , it is to be seen that no deficiency occurs due to lack of 
coordination  amongst Headquarters  office, division office, RRB , examination 
conducting agency  and local  bodies.  
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
103 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.2.2  Compassionate  Appointments  
In respect of appointment  on compassionate  grounds, the following checks  
should be exercised :- 
I) That appointment  on compassionate  grounds has been given only in 
following conditions - 
a) Death  of Railway  servant.  
b) Railway  servants missing  for seven years/three years in certain cases 
in which case approval  of GM  is required.  
c) Permanently incapacitated Railway  servants for whom no alternative 
job is available.  
II) That the person is one who is eligible to be appointed on compassionate  
grounds i.e. Son, adopted Son, Daughter, adopted Daughter, Widow/ 
Widower. In case a near relative is consi dered for appointment  on 
compassionate grounds it should be seen that necessary conditions framed  
in this regard have been met with.  
III) That in case of appointment  of adopted Son and adopted Daughter it 
should be seen that there is satisfactory legal  proof of adoption and was 
valid before the death/medical  de-categorisation of Railway  servants.  
IV) That the appointment  has been made within the stipulated time  period of 
five years from the date of occurr nce of the event. Personal  approval  of 
General  Manager  is required for cases of compassionate  appointment 
beyond the period of five years and upto twenty -five (25) years.  
V) That the person appointed as a trainee on compassionate  grounds has 
acquired the minimum educational  qualification  within five years of 
appointment .  
VI) That the probation  period of the person appointed as trainee on 
compassionate  grounds is taken into consideration only from the date 
he/she acquires the minimum educational  qualification .  
VII) That no Overtime  Allowance  is paid to the person appointed as trainee on 
compassionate  grounds.  
VIII) That all appointments on  compassionate  grounds are made only in the 
recruitment  grades like Office  Clerk , Commercial  Clerk, Assistant  Station  
Master  Etc. and not in the intermediate grade i.e. one, which is filled 
purely by promotion . 
IX) That the appointment  has been made by the competent  authority  viz. 
General  Manager  or the authority  to which  such powers have been 
delegated.  
X) That relaxation in age and educational  qualification  has been given  by the 
competent  authority .  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
104 
For internal use of IA&AD  (RB’s Master  Circular  No. 16 , RB’s letter No. E (NG) II/98/RC -1/64 dated 
31.05.2011  RB’s letter No. E (NG) II/1998/RC -1/64 dated 14.09.2012 ) 
7.2.3 Appointment  against Sports  Quota  
Recruitment  of sports person both in Group  ‘C’ and ‘D’ is done through (i) Talent 
Scouting and (ii) Open  Advertisement. Sixty percent of the total quota, including 
the share of Railway  Sports  Promotion  Board  (RSPB ), is done through Talent 
Scouting and balance  forty percent through Open Advertisement. The recruitment  
is done by RSPB, Zonal  Railways  and Production  Units  against the quota allotted 
to each. Talent Scouting Quota  of RSPB Pool is to be operated by RSPB. 
However, the requests of Zonal Railways / Production Units etc., duly 
recommended by the President  of their Sports Association  for release of berths 
from RSPB Pool, may be c onsidered by RSPB on merit. ( RB’s letter No. 
E(Sports)/2007/Policy /3 dated 30.03.2007 ) 
During Audit  of recruitment  against Sports  Quota  the following should be 
seen- 
I) That the quota allotted for the financial  year is utilised during the 
particular year and is not carried forward.  
II) That th e sports achievement of the recruitee is in the immediate previous 
two years from the date of receipt  of application  or the date of notification 
as the case may be.  
III) That the recruitment  of sports pers on is made to a grade where there is an 
element of direct  recruitment  and that it is counted against such quota.  
IV) That the recruitment  in the intermediate grades are done with the approval  
of the Railway  Board .  
V) That the recruitment  in the Production  Units  for sports person in the 
category of Skilled Artisans against the Group  ‘C’ quo ta is counted 
against the 25 percent direct  recruitment  quota of Skilled Artisans. 
Further , such officials will have to complete the prescribed  training .  
VI) That no relaxation in age limi t and minimum educational  qualification  
was granted in recruitment  through Open  Advertisement. In case of 
recruitment  through Talent Scouting, any relaxation in the educational 
qualification is permitted after the approval  of the Railway  Board , subject 
to acquiring the minimum educational qualification within a period of 
three years from the date of such appoi ntment . Besides this, it should be 
seen that the relaxation in age for recruitment  against Talent Scouting is 
granted with the approval  of the Railway Board .  
7.2.4 Substitutes  
Substitutes  are the persons engaged in Railways  on regular scales of pay  and 
allowances  in a vacant post , the process of filling of which has been delayed and 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
105 
For internal use of IA&AD  such posts  cannot be kept vacant due to exigencies of work  otherwise Railway  
Service  may get adversely affected.  
The substitutes  in erstwhile Group  ‘D’ are to be engaged wit h prior personal 
approval  of the General  Manager  and those in Group ‘C’, with the prior approval  
of the Railway  Board .  
The maximum  number of Substitutes  that can be engaged for Safety  and Train  
Operations  in a financial  year would be ten percent of the vacancies  calculated as 
on 1st April of the year to be filled up during the financial  year. For other 
categories the maximum  number of Substitutes that can be engaged is two percent 
of the vacancies  in these categories. The assess ment  of ten percent and two 
percent vacancies  would be done by the Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer from 
the beginning of the financial  year.  
The foll owing Audit  checks  should be exercised while reviewing the 
appointment  of Substitutes - 
I) Whether  a register  for engagement  of substitutes  is being maintained.  
II) Whether  personal approval  of the General  Manager /Railway  Board  was 
taken for engaging substitutes  in Group  ‘D’/Group ‘C’ category 
respectively.  
III) That the assessment  of vacancies  by the Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer 
was done correctly.  
IV) That the substitutes  engaged possess the requisite educational  
qualification .  
V) That to avoid any fraud /impersonation, the laid  down procedure of 
verification / authentication of  Engagement  Letter from PCPOs office by 
the division/unit  concerned was followed.  
VI) That no temporary status is conferred to the engaged substitutes  prior to 
completion  of four months’ c ontinuous service . 
VII) That the engaged substitutes  are given all rights and privileges  of a 
temporary Railway  employee only after completion  of four months of 
continuous  service . 
VIII) That only those substitutes  are absorbed in regular employment who are 
in the current  substitutes  register .  
(RB’s letter No. E(NG) -II/2008/SB/SR /15 dated 17.09.2010  and dated 
21.12.2010 ) 
7.2.5 Re-engagement  of retired  Railway  servants  
Although presently Railway  Board  has discontinued the engagement of retired  
Railway servants [RB’s letter No. E(NG)II/2020/RC -4/2 (Pt 2) dated 22.12.2020] 
but in view of the acute shortage of staff in various categories of posts  the Railway 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
106 
For internal use of IA&AD  Board  time to time permits the Zonal  Railways  to re -engage retired employees 
subject to the following conditions - 
I) Railway  should issue necessary notification for such re -engagement by 
giving wide publicity through open advertisement.  
II) Re-engaged employees should not ha ve been covered under the safety 
Related Retirement Scheme/Liberalized  Active Retirement Scheme for 
Guaranteed Employment for Safety  Staff  (LARSGESS ). 
III) While engaging such staff, medical fitn ess of the appropriate category 
should be obtained from the designated authorities.  
IV) Suitability/competency of the staff should also be adjudged before 
engaging and the issue of their safety record should be addressed.  
During Audit  of cases re lating to re -engagement  of retired  staff  the following 
checks  should be exercised - 
I) The re -engagement  is done considering reasonable justification  for the 
same.  
II) Necessary procedure of issuing notification for such re -engagement  
through Open  Advertisement was followed.  
III) No staff  covered  under Safety  Related Retirement  Scheme  / LARSGESS  
are re -engaged.  
IV) The re -engaged staff are found medically  fit by the appropriate  authority , 
if engaged for safety  category and other operational  requirements.   
V) The re -engagement  of such employees  is not done beyond the prescribed  
age limit of 65 years.  
VI) Remuneration  to the r e-engaged employees  plus their full pension does 
not exceed their last pay  drawn.  
VII) The services of the re -engaged staff  are terminated immediately on 
joining of selected candidates from RRBs.  
(RB’s letter No. E(NG)II/2010/RC -4/6 dated 27.09.2012  read with letter No. 
E(NG) -II/2007/RC -4/CORE /1 dated 12.12.2017 ) 
Note: Scheme was terminated by RB Vide Letter No.E(P&A)I -2015/RT -43 dated 
26.09.2018  
7.3 Training  and Development  
The Railways  provide training  to all categories of staff  and Officers  with a view 
to improving their skills and ability.  Training  is imparted  in Railway  
Zonal  Schools, Systems  Technical  Schools and other such institutions  of each 
Railway . The courses conducted at the training  institutions  are broadly divided 
into 4 categories, viz.  
I) Initial or induction training  to meet the needs of new  recruits;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
107 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Promotion  courses for employees  who have to undertake duties of 
a different  nature  with higher responsibility;  
III) Refresher courses to keep the employees  abreast of the latest 
developments in their own  subjects for better discharge of their duties and 
responsibilities; and  
IV) Special  types of courses to meet  specific needs, such as management  
courses, work  study courses, operational  research  seminars , etc.  
The Railways  have also been taking  advantage of the  offers of training  facilities 
abroad under the various technical  aid plans  of Foreign  Governments and 
Agencies . (Para-407 of Indian  Railway  Administration  & Finance ) 
The duration of initial training  and stipend  to be paid to Apprentices  and trainees 
of various departments  of Railways  has been prescribed  by the Railway  Board .  
(RB’s letter No. PC -V/2016/PS/1(Stipend ) dated 02.02.2017 )  
During check of records pertaining to train ing to various officials it should 
be seen that - 
I) the Zonal  Railways  have followed the periodicity  of initial training  for 
technical  and non -technical cat egory as per Railway  Board  norms ; 
II) in case of prescribed  period of training  being followed was at variance 
with the laid  down norms , Railway  Board  sanction was obtained;  
III) the stipend  paid to the Apprentices  and trainees was as per rates prescribed  
by the Railway  Board ; 
IV) periodical  refresher courses at stated intervals  are being conducted as per 
the guidelines  and orders of the Railway  Board  from time  to time  (Para -
118 (a) of IREM  Vol. I) ; 
V) in respect of employees  failing in trade test, it is to be seen that no 
relaxation in the standard of trade test was allowed at the time  of 
reappearance in the trade test after an interval of six months (Para -118 (b) 
of IREM  Vol. I) ; 
VI) required  security  deposit  was made by the apprenti ces/trainees during 
their prescribed  training  period ( Para-119 of IREM  Vol. I ); and  
VII) the required agreement for the period of training /apprenticeship was 
entered into (Para -120 (iii) of IREM  Vol. I) . 
VIII) Recruitment of Act  apprentices and obtaining reimbursement of 25 per 
cent of stipend paid to Apprentices  under National Apprenticeship 
Promotion  Scheme20 
                                                           
20 Guidelines for Implementation of National Apprentice Promotion  Scheme  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
108 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.4 Salary  and Allowances  
After computerization , salary is prepared and processed on Accounting 
Information  Management  System  (AIMS ) Software . All the related schedules and 
reports  are generated by the system . Besides this, electricity bills  are taken into 
account  for recovery through AIMS by the Elec tricity  Department  itself and the 
system  has also been linked with Crew  Management System (CMS ) for payment 
of Kilometrage  Allowance  and Al lowance In lieu of Kilometrage (ALK).  
After the implementation  of recommendations  of the 7th Central  Pay 
Commission , a system  of pay  levels has been introduced which contains 18 pay  
levels in a matrix of 40  years of service . The annual  increment  is now granted 
either on 1st January or on 1st July.  
During audit  of pay bills, it should be seen that -  
I) there is a proper sanction to the post  held by the employee;  
II) if more than one employee is shown as on duty  against one and the same 
post, or if an employee is shown as on duty against a post not sanctioned  
by the competent  authority , the pay  and allowances  of the employee 
concerned is held under objection. ( Para-1409 A -1); 
III) the employee is entitled to the amount paid to him and of which he is 
actually in charge. ( Para-1302 A -1); 
IV) the pay bill of each unit  contains a summary of the sanctioned  strength  
and the actual stren gth of the unit . Instances of excess over the sanctioned  
strength  should be taken up. ( Para-1408 A -1); and  
V) the allocation  of the charges  and that of the recovery has been correctly 
made;  
A detailed check should be carried out with reference to the following:  
I) For new  posts, it should be seen that sanction to the post  has been 
obtained.  (Para-1207 A -I) 
II) For first appointme nt to railway  service  the following documents  should 
be examined - 
a) Order of appointment ;  
b) Health  certificate  as required by rule;  
c) Report of the date of birth duly supported by authentic records, as 
required under the rules ;  
III) For transfer:  
a) Last Pay  Certificates;  
b) Reports  of dates of handing and taking over charge in the case of 
Gazetted  Officers.  
IV) In case of leave : 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
109 
For internal use of IA&AD  a) Sanction  to the leave , and statement of its nature and extent;  
b) Admissibility of the leave  salary claimed under the rules  applicable to 
each case;  
V) In the cases of promotion , increment  or any new  claim that the sanction 
of competent  authority  exists.  
VI) Necessary  certificate  required to be furnished in support  of the House  
Rent  Allowance  drawn for the periods of leave /temporary transfers have 
been given.  
VII) Increment  certificate  is appended t o the first bill in which a periodical  
increment  is drawn for a Government  Servant.  
VIII) Allowances  other than pay , personal pay , overseas pay , deputa tion 
allowance etc. have been sanctioned  by the competent  authority .  A 
reference to the original sanction should always be made in such cases.  
IX) House  Rent  Allowance  has not been drawn for employees  who have been 
allotted Railway /Government  accommodation.  
X) Departments  having a leave  reserve, no substit ute is engaged even when 
the num ber of officers on leave  exceeds the leave  reserve unless specially 
permitted under any extant  orders.  
XI) No pay has been passed for a Government  servant  beyond the date of 
attaining the age of superannuation or on the expiry of a term of extension 
of service  sanctioned  by competent  authority . 
XII) Audit of pay  bills of Gazetted  Officers is carried out with the help of 
Salary  Audit  Registers maintained in the Accounts  Office  (Para-1305 A -
I) in which details such as  all sanctions  to pay , leave  and transfer and the 
recoveries  to be made etc. are record ed. The bills  are traced in the Cadre  
Register  (A 1319)  to see that the sanctioned  scales have not been 
exceeded.  
XIII) The recovery of electricity charges  has been made from the staff  
occupy ing railway  quarters  and the same was taken into account  while 
preparation of salary bill through AIMS . 
7.4.1 Check  of Allowances  
Dearness  Allowance  
Railway  servants are granted dearness  allowance on the scales and under the 
conditions laid  down by the Central  Government  from time  to time  (Para-1401         
R-II). The dearness allowance is a distinct element of remuneration  and is not 
treated as pay  within the ambit of Rule  1303 [FR -9 (21), R -II]. 
During audit  it should be seen that - 
I) in case of an employee under suspension , the dearness  allow ance paid is 
as per the actual subsistence allowance ( Para-1411 R -II); 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
110 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) in case of joining and leaving service , the dearness  allowance is 
determined with reference to the monthly  rate of pay  and will be 
proportionate  to the actual days of employment in the month  (Para-
1408R -II); 
III) the dearness  allowance is paid based on leave  salary sanctio ned during 
Study Leave  (Para-1413 R -II); 
IV) the dearness  allowanc e is not paid during Extra  Ordinary Leave  without 
pay (Para-1412 (1) (a) R-II); and  
V) in case of leave  preparatory to retirement  spent in India , Dearness  
Allowance  is paid only during the first 180 days but if leave  preparatory 
to ret irement  is spent outside India, Dearness Allowance is not paid ( Para-
1412 (1) (a) R -II). 
Hous e Rent  Allowances  
All Railway  servants, other than those provided with Government  
accommodation/hired accommodations , posted at qualified cities s hall be paid 
House  Rent  Allowance  without production  of rent  receipts  or receipts  for 
payment towards house  or property  tax. Only a certificate  is required to be 
furnished by the employee that he is incurring some expenses  on rent. The HRA  
shall also be payable to the employees  who ar e living in their own houses subject 
to the production of a certificate  that they are paying towards house or property  
tax or maintenance  of the house ( Para-1703 R -II). The rates of HRA admissible 
is as under - 
Classification  
of Cities/Towns  Rate  of House  Rent  Allowance  per month  as a 
percentage  of Basic Pay  only 
X 24% 
Y 16% 
Z 8% 
The rates  of HRA  would not be less than Rs. 5400, Rs.3600 and Rs.1800 at X, Y 
and Z cla ss cities respectively. The rates would be revised to 27%, 18% and 9% 
for X, Y and Z class cities respectively when Dearness  Allowance  (DA) crosses 
25% and further revised to 30%, 20% and 10% when DA crosses 50 %. The term 
‘basic pay ’ in the revised pay  structure means the pay  drawn in the prescribed  
pay levels in the Pay  Matrix and does not include Non -Practicing Allowance  
(NPA) etc. or any other type of pay  like special  pay, etc. ( RB’s letter No. 
E(P&A)II -2017/HRA -7 dated 19.07.2017 ) 
The payment of House  Rent  Allowance  shall be subjected to the following 
audit  checks - 
I) That the payment of HRA  is paid as per the  rates in vogue;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
111 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) That no HRA  is paid to Railway  servants if he shares accommodation 
allotted to his parents, son, daughter by Railway, Government / 
Autonomous  Public  undertakin g and semi -Government organisation  
(Para 1706 R -II); 
III) That no HRA  is paid to a R ailway  servant if his wife/her husband has been 
allotted Government /Railway accommodation at the same station (Para  
1706 R -II); 
IV) That no HRA  is paid to a Railway  servant who proceeded on leave  in 
excess of 180 days except in conditions provided in Para  1707 of R -II; 
V) That no HRA  is paid to a Railway  servant for the entire period of leave  
who proceeded on sanctioned  leave  whether on medical  grounds or 
otherwise, does not join duty  after availing such leave  and resigns (Para  
1707 R -II); 
VI) That no HRA  is paid to Apprentices  (other than Mechanics) and 
probationers in non -gazetted  service  during the period of their trai ning; 
VII) In case of transfer it should be seen that no HRA  is paid to a Railway  
servant who is transferred to another station and retains the quarter at old 
station for a period beyond eight months or to the end of  the Academic 
year of children  (RB’s letter No. E(G) 2011 QR1 -15 dated 28.04.2015 ); 
VIII) In case of transfer, no HRA  is paid to a Railway  servant at the new  station 
who has unauthorisedly retained Railway accommodation and paid 
damage  rent at old station (RB ’s No. E(P&A)II/83/HRA/6 dated 
20.05.1983 ); 
IX) That a Railway  servant under temporary transfers not exceeding 180 days 
is paid HRA  with reference to rate  applicable at old station (RB ’s No. 
E(P&A)II/87/HRA/CCA/31 dated 18.11.1987; and  
X) That a Railway  servant under training  is allowed HRA  only on production  
of requ ired certificate  prescribed  in Rule  1707 (iii)  R-II (Para-1713 R -II). 
XI) That in event of occupation of Railway  accommodation beyond 
permissible period at the previous place of posting, no HRA  is paid to the 
Railway servant at new  place of posting. ( RB’s letter no. (EG)99 QR1 -16 
dated 16.03.2004 ) 
Children  Education  Allowance  (CEA )/Hostel  Subsidy   
The reimbursement  of Children  Education  Allowance  (CEA )/Hostel  Subsidy  is 
admissible only for the two eldest surviving children  with the exception  that in 
case the second child  birth results in twins/ multiple births , it would be treated as 
single delivery . In case of failure  of sterilization operation , the CEA/Hostel 
Subsidy is admissible in respect of children  born out of the first instance of such 
failure beyond the usual two children  norm.  
The amount for reimbursement  of Children  Education  allowance will be 
Rs.2250/ - per month  (fixed ) per child , irrespective of the actual expenses  incurred 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
112 
For internal use of IA&AD  by the Govt . Servant. In order to claim reimbursement of CEA , the Govt. servant 
should produce a certificate  issued by the Head of the Institution for the 
period/year for which claim has been preferred. The certificate  should confirm 
that the child  studied in the school during the previous academic year. In case 
such a certificate  cannot be obtained, self -attested copy of the report card or self -
attested fee receipt (s) {including e -receipt(s)} confirming/indicating that the fee 
deposited for the entire academic year can be produced as a supporting document 
to claim CEA. The period year means academic year i.e. twelve months of 
complete academic session.  
The amount of ceiling of hostel subsidy is Rs.6750/ - pm. In order to claim 
reimbursement  of Hostel  Subsidy  for an academic year, a similar certificate  from 
the Head of Institution confirming that the child  studied in the school will suffice, 
with additional  requirement that the certificate  should mention the amount of 
expenditure  incurred by the Government  servant towards lodging and boarding 
in the residential  complex. In case such a certificate  cannot be obtai ned, self -
attested copy of the report card and original fee receipt (s)/e-receipt(s) which 
should indicate the amount of expenditure  incurred by the Government servant 
towards lodging and boarding in the residential  complex can be produced for 
claiming Hostel Subsidy. The expenditure  on boarding  and lodging or the ceiling 
of Rs. 6750/ - as mentioned above, whichever is lower  shall be paid to the 
employee as Hostel Subsidy. The period y ear will mean academic year i.e. twelve 
months of complete academic session.  
The reimbursement  of Children  Education  Allowance  for Divyaang children  of 
government e mployees  shall be payable at double the normal rates of CEA  
prescribed  Rs.2250/ - i.e. Rs.4500/ -. 
The above rates/ceiling would be automatically raised by 25% every time  the 
Dearness  Allowance  on the revised pay  structure goes up by 50%.  
The Hostel  Subsidy  and Children  Education  Allowance  can be claimed 
concurrently.  
During audit  it should be seen :- 
I) That reimbursement  of CEA /Hostel  Subsidy  is paid at prescribed  rates.  
II) In case both the spouses are Government  servants, only one of them avails 
reimbursement  under Children  Education  Allowance  and Hostel  Subsidy . 
III) That the CEA /Hostel  Subsidy  is paid only for two eldest surviving 
children  as prescribed  under the rule.  
IV) That the Hostel  Subsidy  is paid to the eligible child  studying in a 
residential  educational  institution located at least 50 kilometers  from the 
residence of the Government  servant.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
113 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) That the CEA  is not paid to a child  who i s admitted  in the same class in 
another school although the child  passed out from the same class in 
pervious school or in the mid -session.  
VI) That the CEA /Hostel  Subsidy  is not paid bey ond passing of the class XII 
or the age limit prescribed  (20 years and 22 years for Divyaang child ) 
whichever is earlier.  
(RB’s letter No. E(W) 2017/ED -2/3 dated 13.08.2018 ) 
Running  Allowance  
The Running  Allowance  is granted to running  staff for the performance  of duty  
directly connected with the charge of moving trains  and includes Kilometrage  
Allowance or Allowance in lieu of Kilometrage but excludes Special  
Compensatory Allowances . The Running Allowance is paid to the following 
Railway  servants - 
LOCO  TRAFFIC  
1.Loco  Pilots /Assistant  Loco Pilots 
(including Motor  Man and Rail  Motor 
Drivers, but excluding Shunters)  1. Guards  
 
2. Shunters  2. Assistants Guards  
(Para-1507 R -II) 
Following Running  Allowances  are admissible to the Running staff - 
I) Kilometrage  Allowance (Para 906 IREM  Vol-I) 
II) Allowance  in lieu of Kilometrage  (ALK) ( Para 907 IREM  Vol-I and Para-
905 (ii) IREM Vol -I) 
III) Allowances  for Loco  Inspectors  (Para-1514 to 1515 R -II) 
IV) Allowances  for Drivers drafted to perform the duties of Power  
Controllers/Crew  Controllers( Para-1516 R -II) 
In addition to above, the following allowances  are also admissible to running  
staff- 
I) Allowance  in lieu of Running  Room facilities.    
II) Breach  of rest  allowance.    
III) Outstation  (Detention ) Allowance .   
IV) Outstation  (Relieving)  Allowance .   
V) Accident  Allowance .   
VI) An officiating Allowance  when undertaking duties in higher grades of 
posts  open to running  staff or in stationary  appointments.  
(Para-905 (iii) and (iv) IREM  Vol-I) 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
114 
For internal use of IA&AD  During check of running  allowance and other allowances  payable to the 
running  staff  as noted above, the following audit  checks  should be exercised - 
I) That the Kilometrage  Allowance  and Allowance in lieu o f Kilometrage 
are being charged in AIMS  is as per the Crew  Management  System  
(CMS ).  
II) That the manual  corrections if any carried out in the ‘Crew  Sign in det ail’ 
generated by CMS , have been verified by the competent  authority .  
III) That the Running  Allowance  and other such allowances  payable to 
running  staff are paid at the rates prescribed  from time  to time . 
Travelling  Allowance  
Travelling  allowance means an allowance granted to a railw ay servant to cover 
the expenses  which he incurs in travelling  in the interests of the public  service . It 
also includes allowances  granted for the mainten ance of conveyances. ( Para-103 
(52) R -I)  
The following are the different kinds of Travellin g Allowances  payable to a 
Railway  servant - 
I) Permanent  or consolidated travelling  allowance  
II) Conveyance  allowance  
III) Mileage  allowance  
IV) Daily Allowance  
V) Actual cost  of travelling  (Para-1604 R -II) 
During audit  it should be seen that - 
I) the bill is countersigned by the competent  Controlling  Officer.  
II) the claim for travelling  allowance is submitted within 60 days succeeding 
the date of completing of journey. Cases of delayed submission passed 
should have the approval  of the Head of Department . (RB’s letter No. 
F(E)I/2018/AL -28/29 dated 23.03.2018 ) 
III) the claim of the railway  servant re -engaged after retirement  are as per the 
prescribed  rate of 60% of th e applicable daily allowance corresponding to 
the pay  drawn/post  held by him immediately prior to his retirement . (RB ’s 
letter No. F(E)I/2015/AL -28/58 dated 16.03.2017 ) 
IV) for attending a training  course in India , where boarding and lodging are 
not provided, daily allowances  is restricted  upto 180 days.  (RB ’s letter 
No. PC -IV/86/IMP/AL/7 dated 09.02.1987)  
V) no transfer grant  is paid to a railway  servant on temporary transfers not 
exceeding 180 days, in case full daily allowance was paid fo r such period. 
(RB’s letter No. PC -IV/86/IMP/AL/7 dated 09.02.1987)  
VI) on training , other than initial training , where messing facility is 
compulsory, payment of daily allowance is restricted to 20 per c ent of the 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
115 
For internal use of IA&AD  daily allowance admissible. ( Para 1685 R -I and RB ’s letter No. 
E(MPP)85/8/I dated 24.06.1988)   
VII) the travel by air , if any, is covered  by the rules  or special  sanction therefor;  
officers who countersign their own bills  do not abuse this privilege;  
VIII) the payment of travelling  allowance is restricted to the period of 
temporary transfer only;  
IX) the desirability of granting a fixed  conveyance allowance where the 
charges  for conveyances are heavy;  
X) the justification  for the rate of motor car  allowance which may have been 
granted on comparison  with the amount of travelling  to be done;  
XI) the possibility of reduction of fixed  travelling  allowance to officers on 
construction  when the linking  is complete and the free  use of a trolley is 
granted; and  
XII) arrangements exist to deface travelling  allowance journals  accompanying 
travelling allowance bills  in a proper manner to prevent them from being 
passed a second time  for payment.  
XIII) the claim is accompanied by necessary certificates, in special  cases as 
required by  the rules . (Para -1213 (c) A -I) 
XIV)  the claim is accompanied by necessary authority  for travelling  beyond 
jurisdiction . (Para-1213 (d) A -I) 
Transportation  Allowance  
Transportation  allowance is admissible to railway  servants as per their 
entitlement given in RB ’s letter No. PC-V/2017/A/TA /1 dated 03.08.2017 . 
During audit  it is to be seen that - 
I) transportation  allowance is not paid to those employees  who ha ve been 
provided with facility of Government  transport . 
II) transportation  allowance is not paid during the period of deputation  
abroad.  
III) transportation  allowa nce is not paid to a railway  servant who is absent 
from his headquarters /place of posting for full calendar  month (s) on 
leave /tour/training .   
IV) transportation  allowance is not paid to a railway  servant proceeding from 
his residence to the place of duty  beyond 8 kms and back for which road 
mileage /daily allowance or free  transportat ion for 
field/inspections /survey  has been provided.   
V) no transportation allowance is paid to the railway  servant for the particular 
month  where duty  days have been shown as zero in the AIMS . 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
116 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.4.2 Check  of recoveries  
Provident  Fund – All railway  servants, except those who enter service on or after 
Ist January,  2004 and  those who are re -employe d after final retirement  from the 
Government  Service , shall subscribe  to the fund in accordance with Provident 
Fund (PF ) Rules  either from the first of the mon th following that in which they 
complete one year’s continuous service  or from the date of confirmation 
whichever is earlier ( Para-904 R -I). 
Every subscriber shall subscribe  monthly  to the fund when on duty , foreign  
service , deputation  and temporary transfer (Para -908 R -I). The amount of 
subscription  payable for any month  would be 81
3per cent of pay  (Para-909 R -I).  
During the audit  of salary bills , the following audit checks  pertaining to PF  
should be exercised  that- 
I) the subscription  is being deducted as prescribed  rates ( Para-909 R -I). 
II) withdrawals/advances  have been sanctioned  by the competent  authority  
on valid reasons  (Para-922 R -I). 
III) in case withdrawal /advance was sanctioned  after the event, the same was 
applied for not more than three months after the event (Para -922 R -I). 
IV) advance on more than one account  are not sanctioned  simultaneously 
(Para -923 R -I). 
V) no new  advance is granted unless at least 50 per cent of the previously 
sanctioned  advance has been recovered (Para -923 R -I).  
VI) that the amount of advance recoverable  is such that after making all 
permissible dedu ctions, the net amount payable is not less than 50 per cent 
of the basic pay  (Para -923 R -I). 
Deducti on under New  Pension  Scheme  – Government  of India  have introduced 
a new  defined contributory  pension system  for the new  entrants to the Central  
Government Service  replacing the existing system  of defined benefits pension 
system . The New Pension System  has come into operation  with effect from 
01.01.2004. The system  is mandatory for all government servants who join 
government service  on or after 01.01.2004. It has two Tiers i.e. Tier -I and Tier -
II. In Tier -I government servants shall compul sorily make a contribution  at the 
rate of 10 per cent of salary and DA  and a matching contribution will be made by 
the government. The existing provisions of defined benefit pension and 
SRPF/GPF would not be ava ilable to the new  recruits in the central  government 
service  joining government service  w.e.f. 01.01.2004. In addition to the Tier -I, 
each government servant may also have a Tier -II withdrawable a ccount  at his 
option. Government will not make any contribution to Tier -II account . 
Government servant covered  under the new  system  can exit at or after attaining 
the age of 60 year s from the Tier -I of the system . In case of government servants, 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
117 
For internal use of IA&AD  who leave  the system  before attaining the age of 60 years, the mandatory 
annuitization would be 80 per cent of the pension wealth ( RB’s letter No. 
2004/AC -II/21/1 dated 19.02.2004 ). 
With effect from salary of April 2019 onwards, the government contribution  
would be 14 per cent of basic pay  plus DA  (RB’s letter No. 2016/AC -II/21/7 
dated 04.04.2019 ).  
During audit  it is to be seen that - 
I) recoveries  towards the contribution  to Tier -I of the system  are effected 
from the first of the month  following the month  in which the railway  
servant has joined the service .  
II) Bill Drawing  Officer consolidated the particulars in prescribed  format of 
new entrants during previous month  and sent it to Bill Passing Accounts  
Officer by 7th of each month  to obtain Permanent  Retirement  Account  
Number (PRAN ).  
III) monthly  contribution  is being recovered from the salary of the railway  
servant at prescribed  rates including any arrear payment made from time  
to time .    
IV) in case the railway  servant leaves the system  before attaining the age of 
60 years, the mandatory annuitization is restricted to 80 per cent of the 
pension wealth.  
Group  Insurance  Scheme  (GIS ), 1980      
This scheme has been provided for railway  employees  at contributory  and self -
financing basis. This scheme extends twin benefits of an insurance  cover to help 
their families in the event of death in service  and a lumpsum  payment on 
retirement . The scheme is compulsorily applicable to all entrants joining railway  
service  from 01.11.1980 and employees  appointed prior to 01.11.1980 are also 
automatically covered  by the scheme unless they specifically opt out of it by 
exercising an option.  
A monthly  amount of Rs.30, Rs. 60 and Rs. 120 for Group  ‘C’, Group ‘B’ and 
Group ‘A’ respectively is subscribed under the scheme which is deducted from 
the monthly  salary bill.  
During audit  of GIS  related item, the following audit checks  are to be done - 
I) that the employee is enrolled under the scheme from 1st of January every 
year and those who join the service  on or after 2nd January of the year will 
be entitled only for insurance  cover upto 31st December of that year.  
II) that nomination  made by the railway  servants under the scheme matches 
with that mentioned in the service  book.  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
118 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) that the payment made from insurance  fund and saving fund is as per the 
table of benefits admissible as issued by the Railway  Board  and to the 
nominee as per the service  records.  
IV) when valid nomination  is not available the a mount payable under the 
scheme would be as per the nomination, if any, made by the deceased 
employee under PF  Rules . If there is no nomination under PF, the head  of 
office arranges payment equally to the eligible membe rs.  
V) that the addition of members is reflected under exceptional cases of AIMS  
generated CGEGIS statement summary in the month  of January only.    
Other recoveries  
During audit  it is to be seen th at quarter rent , electricity charges  and water  charges  
are being regularly recovered from the railway  servants occupying railway  
quarters . Further i t should be seen that whenever such charges  are revised 
retrospectively, the arrears  thereof are recovered promptly. In the cases of 
retention of quarters, it should be seen that retention is covered  by prope r sanction 
and the rent/penal rent of the retained quarter is recovered as per orders in vogue.  
If an employee is transferred from one bill unit  to other in AIMS , it is to be 
checked whether all deduction viz. quarter rent, recov ery of advances  etc. have 
been taken into account .  
Audit  of Sanctions  and Orders  
(Para-804 and 805 A -1 and Regulation 46 and 50 of Regulations  on Audit ) 
The Railways  are required to en dorse or otherwise send copies to Audit  relating 
to rules , regulations  and general orders in respect of raising of revenues, incurring 
of expenditure  and liabilities  and management  of assets  and liabilities .  
Checks  given in Para 804 to 809 A -1 should be kept in mind while auditing  
sanctions .  
Sanctions  to be dealt with in the Personnel  Branch  will generally relate to creation 
and abolition  of posts , extension of currency  of temporary posts , sanctions  of loan 
and advances , special  pay/qualification  pay, honorarium etc.  
Following checks  may be exercised during Audit  of Establishment  Sanctions  
and Orders - 
I) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations are endorsed 
by the Finance  Department , wherever necessary.  
II) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations a re issued 
under the signature  of the officers concerned in ink  and not over 
cyclostyled  signatures . 
III) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations a re financially 
justified duly s atisfying the Standards  (canons) of financial  propriety  
(Para 116 of F -I). 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
119 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) The sanctioning authority  is competent  to do so as per the Schedule  of 
Powers.  
V) The currency  of sanction of a temporary post  has been extended under the 
approval  of competent  authority . 
7.5 Transfers and Postings  
The instructions  for periodical  transfers and postings of railway  employees  covers 
two broad  category of staff  (i) staff  of Commercial  department and Operating  
department (ii) staff  working in offices such as Pay  Bill section , Stores  offices, 
Accounts  offices, Fuel  section , Medical  department etc. Besides this, certain 
posts  in various departments  have been id entified as “sensitive posts ” (RB ’s letter 
No. E(NG)I -2009/TR/7 dated 03.04.2012 ). 
During audi t of records of transfer and posting, it is to be seen that - 
I) railway  servants holding a sensitive post  including those who frequently 
come into contact with public  and/or contractors /suppliers  are transferred 
from one place to another or to a non -sensitive seat in the same place 
every four years.  
II) any transfer order issued for temporary transfers, specifically mentioned 
that such transfers are on temporary basis.  
III) no commercial  staff transferred out of the division on complaints  for 
corruptions and who were later exonerated or awar ded a penalty  of 
censure are  transferred back to the parent division . 
IV) the request transfers were allowed in only initial recruitment  grades. In 
case of intermediate grades in which direct  recruitment  is involved, the 
transfer should be allowed only against vacant direc t recruitment  quota 
post (RB’s letter No. E(NG)I -2004/TR/16 dated 14.08.2007 ) 
V) the mutual  transfers are allowed between employees  belonging to the 
same category i.e. General  with General, SC with SC and ST with ST to 
avoid any hardship to staff  in feeder grade in the matter o f their promotion  
(RB’s letter No. E(NG)I -2004/TR/16 dated 14.08.2007  and Para-310 and 
312 of IREM  Vol. I ) 
VI) the proper registers  are maintained for registering request transfers 
whether at divisional  or workshop and zonal headquarters  level.  
VII) while placing the indents  on the RRBs/RRCs, the extent of additional  
candidates required is decided taking into accounts  the number of 
employees  who have applied for transfer to other divisions /railways.   
7.6 Performance  Appraisal  
The system  of writing of Annual  Confidential  Report  (ACR) was modified to be 
termed as Annual Performance  Appraisal  Report (APAR ) from the reporting 
period 2008 -09 under which full APAR including the overall grade and  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
120 
For internal use of IA&AD  assessment  of integrity shall be communicated to the concerned official after the 
report is complete with the remarks of the Reviewing Officer and the accepting 
authority  wherever such system  is in vogue . A time  schedule  for completion  of 
various activities related to filling, submission, reporting, reviewing and disposal  
of representation, if any, has been laid  down ( DoPT’s OM No. 21011/1/2005 -
Estt(A) (Pt -II) dated 23.07.2009 ). An official may  represent on the assessment 
made and grading given by the Reporting/Reviewing Officer within 15 days of 
the date of re ceipt  of APAR. On receipt of any representation from the official 
the same is required to be disposed of within one month  of the receipt of such 
representation. The decision of the competent  authority  and the final grading shall 
be communicated to the officer reported upon within fifteen days of receipt of the 
decision of the competent authority  (DoPT’s OM No. 21011/1/2005 -
Estt(A)(Part -II) dated 14.05.2009  and RB ’s letter No. 2009/SCC /3/6 dated 
18.08.2009 and RB’s letter No. E(NG)I -2009/CR/2 dated 30.04.2010).  
The writing of APARs for railwa y servants in the Grade  Pay of Rs. 1900 which 
was earlier exempted has been introduced by the Railway  Board  (RB’s letter No. 
E(NG)I -2013/CR/1 dated 30.12.2014 ) and for ra ilway  servants in Grade Pay of 
Rs. 1800, the same it has been introduced from 2018 -19 onwards ( RB’s letter No. 
E(NG)I -2013/CR/1 dated 11.01.2019 ). 
During audit  it is to be seen that - 
I) the APARs of all the officials ha ve been received duly completed and  
whether the Personnel  Branch  at Headquarters /Division /other field 
offices monitored the completion  process.    
II) the laid  down time  schedule  from completion  of APAR  process has been 
adhered to.  
III) the representation received from any railway  servant has been disposed 
of within the prescribed  time. 
IV) there is no delay in promotion  of the official merely because of non -
availability of the APAR  for a particular period for which it has become 
due ( RB’s letter No E(NG)I -81 CR/4 dated 14.07.1981 ).   
7.7 Employee services and benefits  
I) Leave – Railway  servants are governed with Railway Services  
(Liberalised Leave) Rules , 1949.  
Following kinds of leaves are admissible to a railway  servant - 
a) Leave  on average  pay (LAP ) (Para-523 R -I and Para-1110 R -I) 
b) Leave  on half average  pay (LHAP ) (Para-526 R -I) 
c) Commuted  leave  (Para-527 R -I) 
d) Leave  not due  (Para-528 R -I and Para-529 R -I) 
e) Extra  Ordinary Leave  (Para-530 R -I) 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
121 
For internal use of IA&AD  During check of leave  account  by audit , it should be seen that - 
a) the period of extraordinary leave /dies -non has been considered while 
affording cre dit for the next half year and reduced by 1/10th in case of 
LAP  and 1/18th in case of LHAP  accordingly subject to maximum  of 
15 days ( Para-524(3) R -I)/ 10 days in case of LAP and LHAP 
respectively ( Para-526 (7) R -I).  
b) LHAP  of not more than 24 months in one spell is sanctioned  even in 
combination with any other kind of leave  (Para-526(c) R -I). 
c) twice the leave  is debited  against LHAP  due for when sanctioned  as 
commuted  leave (Para-527(b) R -I). 
d) in case a railway  servant resigns from service  or voluntarily retires 
during the period of leave  not due without returning to duty , the leave  
not due is cancelled and his resignation/voluntary  retirement  is 
deemed to be ef fective from the date of which such leave  had 
commenced. The recovery of leave  salary for the period is also 
affected. In case he joins the duty but resigns or retires from service  
before earning such leave , the leave  salary for the period of such leave  
is to be refunded by the railway  servant ( Para-528 R -I). 
e) leave  not due of not more than 360 days on medical  grounds is granted 
during the entire service  of railway  servant ( Para-528 R -I). 
f) the leave  preparatory to retirement  of not more than 240 days is 
granted to a railway  servant ( Para-540 R -I). 
g) the leave  account  of railway  servant due to retire next year should be 
specially seen before the commencement of the year in which the 
railway  servant is due to retire.  
h) the leave  availed is debited  to the leave  account  which may be cross 
checked from attendance  register  and sanctioned  leave  application . 
II) Railway  Passes  and PTOs – Following kinds of pas ses are admissible to 
a railway  servant or the entitled members of his/her only and dependent 
relatives -  
a) Duty  Pass 
b) Privilege  Pass 
c) School Pass   
d) Post Retirement  Complementary Pass  
e) Passes  to Widows of Railway  employees  
f) Residential  Card  Pass 
g) Special  Passes  
 
 
 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
122 
For internal use of IA&AD  The following audit  checks  should be applied while checking the records 
pertaining to Passes  and PTOs that - 
a) actual stock  of passes  and privilege ticket orders on hand  agrees with 
the number shown in the stock  register , 
b) cheque and card passes  and privilege ticket orders issued to staff , to 
contractors  or other have been issued a ccording to the pass rules  of 
the Railway  and/or the Indian  Railways  Conference Association ; 
c) passes  and privilege ticket orders issued to staff  have been duly 
recorded in their personal accounts ; 
d) passes  and privilege ticket orders have been signed by authorised 
persons and none have been signed in advance,  
e) the used/ expired passes  have been retu rned by the employees  in time  
and pasted to block  foils as required by rules , and  
f) passes  and privilege ticket orders have been issued as per the 
entitlement of the railway  servant.  
g) not more than two dependents are included in Privilege  Pass/PTO  
subject to that the total number of persons are not exceeded five.  
h) children  above 21 years of age are not included in  Privilege  Pass/PTO  
except the condition of entitlement VI in Schedule -III of Railway  
Servant Pass Rule , 1986 . 
i) privilege passes  are issued by the shortest route  or the quickest route.  
j) a railway  servant who proceeds on unauthorised absence/long leave  
and does not surr ender the metal pass, three times the cost  of metal 
pass is recovered from the railway  servant ( RB’s letter E(W)99 PS -5-
1/10 dated 02.07.1999 ) 
k) in respect of school pass it should be seen that the school certificate  
should be submitted once a year duly signed by the 
Headmaster/Principal  of the recognized  institution.  
l) where a guardian is included in a school pass, the age of the schooling 
son is under 18 years.  
m) no school passes  are issued where the child  is studying at the 
headquarter  of the rai lway  servant.  
n) the facility of the companion is allowed to a railway  servant who is 
above the age of 65 years.  
o) one set of post  retirement  complementary pass has been disallowed 
for every month  or part thereof above ten days of unauthorised 
retention of railway  quarter by the railway  servant ( RB’s letter 
E(W)99 PS -5-1/41 dated 03.11.1999 ). 
p) post retirement  complementary passes  are not issued to those railway  
servants who have been dismissed or removed from service  or on 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
123 
For internal use of IA&AD  whom a penalty  of cent percent cut in pension and gratuity has been 
imposed.  
q) no attendant is allowed in residential  card pass.  
III) Payment under  Employee’s Compensation  Act, 1923  – This Act was 
earlier known as Workmen ’s Compensation Act and is applicable to the 
employees  mentioned in Section  2(1) (dd) Schedule -II of the Act. Under  
this Act, an employer is liable to discharge his liability  to a Workman or 
his dependents for accident  arising out of, and in the course of,  his 
employment on account  of either death or disablement whether permanent  
or temporary.  
The following points should be borne in mind in auditing  such payments - 
a) That the employee  was on duty  at the time  of injury and that the injury 
arose in the course of and out of the employment;  
b) That the injured is a workman as defined in the Employee ’s 
Compensation  Act, Section  2(1) (dd) and  employed on monthly  
wages  not exceeding Rs. 8000/ - in any such capacity as is specified in 
Schedule  II of Employee ’s Compensation Act;  
c) That there is full evidence of accident  and a medical  report, accident  
report and Police  Report  in serious accidents  are attached in original 
to claims duly signed and attested. The exact nature of final injury 
should be specified  and it should be ascertained whether there was any 
aggravation due to refusal to take railway  medical help that there is 
no evidence of pretention;  
d) That the injury was not due to possibilities which could be foreseen 
and prevented, contrib utory  negligence, disobedience of order or 
influence of drink or other intoxicant. It may also be examined 
whether the employee got in or out of a moving train when he had 
been definitely instructed not to do so;  
e) In cases of payments t o dependents (as, defined in Section  2(1) (d) of 
Employee’s Compensation  Act) on account  of the death of the 
employee , it should be seen that the death occurred in the course of 
his employ ment;  
f) That the method of calculating wages  has been correctly followed as 
described in Section  5 of the Employee’s Compensation  Act; 
g) That the half monthly  payments are correctly  made and deducted from 
hospital  leave  salary payments made, if any;  
h) The pay  order should be traced into the register  of payments under 
Employee’s Compensation  Act maintained by Accounts  Office ; 
i) Where the Railway  pays compensation  for contractors ’ labour , it 
should be seen that the amount is recovered from the con tractor.  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
124 
For internal use of IA&AD  j) The compensation  payment under the Act  is made within due date to 
avoid interest  and penalty  payments (Section  4A). 
IV)  Hours  of Employment  Regulations  (HOER )-The hours of employment 
of Railway  Servants are regulated under the provisions given in Chapter 
XIV of the Railways  Act 1989 and instructions  issued by the Railway 
Board  from time  to time . Hours of Employment Regulations are 
applicable to all non -gazetted  railway  servants including casual  labour  
and substitutes  except the employees  governed under the Factories  Act, 
the Mines Act, the Minimum Wages  Act and the Merchant Shipping Act. 
Under  these regulations , Railway employees  have been classified  as 
‘intensive’, ‘continuous’, ‘essentially intermittent’ and ‘excluded’ 
categories for the purpose of hours of work . Details of dail y duty  hours, 
weekly standard hours, weekly rest  hours, weekly statutory  hours and 
basis for commuting the duty hours have been given under these 
regulations . When the Railway servants are req uired to work  extra hours 
than the prescribed , they would be entitled for payment of overtime  
allowance (OTA).  
During check of payments under HOER , it should be seen that - 
a) duty roster has been framed  for optimum  utilization of existing staff  
so that payment of Overtime  Allowance  is minimized . 
b) cases of absence of more than 36 hours of running  staff from 
Headquarters  is being monitored closely to restrict such absence 
within reasonable limits.  
c) job analysis  of duty  hours of motor car  drivers is car ried out to 
determine the actual period of working.  
d) practice  of granting compensatory off is adopted to curb the payment 
of OTA.  
e) OTA has been paid at prescribed  rates.  
(Authority : Chapter XIV  of Railway  Act 1989, RB ’s letter nos. 
E(LL)2009/HER/1 dated 26.02.20 10 and PC-V/2008/A/O/3 (OTA) dated 
17.02.2010 ) 
7.8 Promotions and Demotions  
Promotions of Group  ‘A’ officers and promotions from Group ‘B’ to Group ‘A’ 
are done with the approval  of the Railway  Board  (Para-208 to 213 R -I). 
Promotions from Group ‘C’ to Group ‘B’ and Group ‘D’ to Group ‘C’ are done 
at the Zonal  Railway.  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
125 
For internal use of IA&AD  The following audit  checks  may be exercised while review ing cases of 
promotions - 
I) The calendar  of selection was being maintained at various levels for 
considering the cases of promotions.  
II) Assessment  of vacancies  was done timely to avoid any delays and 
consequ ential grievances  from the promotees.  
III) Correspondence  regarding cases of erroneous promotions and 
consequences thereof if any, may also be seen.  
IV) A vacancy existed in the cadre  in which the railway  servant was  
promoted.  
V) In case of work  charged post , such a post was current  at the time  of the 
promotion . 
VI) A railway  servant was found fit to perform the duties attached to the po st 
in which he was considered the promotion . 
VII) The railway  servant had cleared the requisite training  and trade test, if 
any, prescribed  for such promotion . 
VIII) Ad-hoc promotions have been kept to the bare minimum.  
IX) The composition of Departmental  Promotion  Committee  was as per the 
prescribed  norms . 
Modified  Assured Career  Progression Scheme  (MACPS ) –  This scheme was 
introduced in supersession of previous Assured Career Progression (ACP) 
scheme on the recommendation of the Sixth Central  Pay Commission  and given 
effect from 01.09.2008. There are three financial  up-gradations under the 
MACPS on completion  of 10, 20 and 30 years of continuous regular service  
counted from t he direct  entry grade or 10 years of continuous service  in the same 
level in pay  matrix, whichever is earlier. The level in the pay  matrix at the time  
of financial  up gradation under the MACPS may be different from the pay  level 
of normal hierarchy  at the time  of regular promotions, as MACPS merely places 
an employee in the immediate next higher level in pay  matrix. MA CPS is 
applicable to all employees  up to Higher Administrative  Grade  (HAG) level 
except members of organised Group  ‘A’ services. The benchmark for 
performance  appraisa l for financial  up gradation under MACPS is ‘Very Good’.  
During audit  of MACPS  cases, it should be seen that - 
I) the Screening Committee  formed for MACPS  meets reg ularly twice a 
year for advance processing of the cases.  
II) the officials being considered for grant  of MACPS  are eligible.  
III) no case of stepping up is granted to any senior official on account  of pay  
fixation  of junior under MACPS . 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
126 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) financial  up gradation under MACP is not granted to an official who had 
refused regular promotion  before becoming entitled to financial  
upgradation till he agrees for regular promotion . 
(RB’s letter No. PC -V/2009/ACP/2 dated 10.06.2009  and PC-V/2016/MACPS /1 
dated 19.12.2016 ) 
7.9 Disciplinary matters  
Railway  servants are governed with the Discipline and  Appeal  Rules, 1968. 
These rules  shall apply to every Railway servant but shall not apply to -  
I) any member of the All India  Services ;  
II) any member of the Railway  Protection  Force  as defined in the Railway 
Protection Force Act , 1957 (23 of 1957) ;  
III) any person in casual  employment; and   
IV) any person for whom special  provision is made, in respect of matters 
covered  by these rules  by or under any law  for the time  being in force or 
by or under any agreement entered into by or with the previous approval  
of the President  before or aft er the commencement of these rules , in 
regard to matters covered  by such special  provisions.  
The following penalties  may be imposed on a Railway  servant under this Act , 
namely: - 
Minor  Penalties -  
I) Censure;  
II) Withholding of his promotion  for a specified period;  
III) Recovery  from his pay  of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss  caused 
by him to the Government  or Railway  Administration  by negligence or 
breach of orders;  
IV) Withholding of the Privilege  Passes  or Privilege Ticket Orders or both;  
V) Reduction to a lower stage in the time  scale of pay  by one stage for a 
period not exceeding three years, without cumulative effect and not 
adversely affecting his pension;  
VI) Withholding of increments of pay  for a specifie d period with further 
directions as to whether on the expiry of such period this will or will not 
have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay ;  
Major  Penalties :- 
I) Save as provided for in clause (iii-b) reduction to a lower stage in the 
time-scale of pay  for a specified period, with further directions as to 
whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have 
the effect of postponing the future increme nts of his pay ;  
II) Reduction to a lower time  scale of pay , grade, post , or service , with or 
without further directions regarding conditions of restoration to the grade 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
127 
For internal use of IA&AD  or post or service  from which the Railway  servant was reduced and his 
seniority and pay  on such restoration to that grade, post or service ;  
III) Compulsory retirement ;  
IV) Removal from service  which shall not be a disqualification for future 
employment under the Government  or Railway  Administration ;  
V) Dismissal from service  which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for 
future employment under the Government  or Railway  Administration . 
During audit  of disciplinary and appeal cases, it should be seen that -   
I) proper mechanism  has been d eveloped to monitor the disciplinary cases 
to avoid delays.  
II) the charge sheet is issued by the appropriate  authority  under the own 
signatures . 
III) in case the disciplinary authority  of a charge d official is also involved in 
the same case, the authority  next higher in the hierarchy  acts as the 
disciplinary authority .  
IV) the charges  mentioned in the charge sheet are specifi c and not vague.  
V) the statement of imputation contains specific rules  and instructions  which 
may have been violated by the charge d officials.  
VI) if after the issue  of charge sheet, certain additional  documents /witnesses 
have been added to the list, a suitable corrigendum is issued.  
VII) if the charge sheet is found to be faulty due to any reason, the same is 
cancelled indicating the reasons for its cancellation  and stating that such 
cancellation  is without prejudice to the right of the administration to issue  
a fresh charge sheet.  
VIII) there is no delay after the issue  of charge sheet in appointing the Inquiry  
Officer to avoid delay in finalization of such cases.  
IX) the Board of inquiry consists of members who are senior in rank to the 
charged officials.  
X) the prescribed  model time  frame of 150 days in major  Disciplinary cases 
and 31  days in minor cases is adhered to. In cases relating to departmental  
accident  inquiries, the time  limit prescribed  is 90 days.  
XI) the payment of subsist ence allowance has been fixed  as per rule and 
reviewed after three months.  
XII) the charges  against the railway  servant are finalised within three months 
of the suspension .   
(RB’s Master  Circular  No. 67 dated 20.10.2002 , No. E(D&A)2008/RG6 -29 dated 
23.09.2008 , No. 2005/Safety (A&R) 6/4 dated 25.03.2014 , No. 
E(D&A)/2014/RG6 -35 dated 18.02.2015 , No. E(D&A)2014/RG6 -35 dated 
21.10.2015  and DoPT’s letter No. 11012/17/2013 -Estt(A) dated 03.07.2015  and 
RB’s letter No. E(G)2017/ Employees /Charter/1 dated 25.10.2017 ) 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
128 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.10 Settling In dustrial  Disputes  
Legal  Cell – Legal cell  at Railway  Board  level works  directly under Member  
(Staff ) under the supervision of Leg al Advisor . Legal Cell renders the legal  
advice  / opinion  on the related subjects that are referred to by the various 
directorates/ officers/ cells and branches in the Railway Board / Zonal  Railways / 
Production  units . Legal cells at Zonal Railway and Divisional  level work  under 
the administrative control  of Administration /General  Branch . Chief  Legal 
Advisors (CLAs) have been deputed in Personnel  branch at Zonal as well as 
Divisional level to deal with legal  cases arising out of personnel matt ers. 
During audit  of Legal  cell, it is to be seen that - 
I) services of advocates, borne on railway  panel, have been utilized . In case 
advocates not on railway  panel have been engaged, sa nction of Railway  
Board  has been obtained. ( RB’s letter No.2002/LC/1/2 dated 24.0 7.2002 )  
II) effective monitoring  has  been done and steps taken to reduce the 
litigation and cut down the expenditure  in contesting court  cases.( RB’s 
letter No. 2018/LC/MISC/07 dated 05.09.2018 ). 
III) prescribed  procedure for engagement  of Railway  Advocates  has been 
followed ( RB’s letter No. 2019/LC/14/1 dated 20.06.2019 ). 
IV) fee is pay  to the advocate as per orders in v ogue [ RB’s letter No. 
2015/LC/17/2 (HC Bombay/Calcutta), {No. 2015/LC/17/2 (DC)}, {No. 
2015/L C/17/2 (Arbitration )}, {No. 2015/LC/17/2 (High  Courts )}]. 
V) in case of contempt of the court , whether responsibility was fixed  and 
instances of contempt minimized ( RB’s letter No. 2002/LC/1/7 dated 
08.04.2002 ). 
7.11 Incentives and Financial  aids 
Productivity  Linked  Bonus  – The scheme of Productivity Linked Bonus was 
started with the objective  to provide substantial motivation towards achieving 
higher productivity  by way of increased output  by the em ployees  and improved 
quality  of service . 
The scheme of Productivity  Linked Bonus  (PLB) was introduced vide  Railway  
Board  letter No. E(P&A)II -79/PLB -1 dated 06.12.1979 . The scheme of PL B 
covers all eligible non -gazetted  railway  empl oyees  (excluding RPF /RPSF  
personnel) without any ceiling on wages . 
During audit  of PLB bills , it is to be seen that - 
I) the payment is made only to the eligible employee;  
II) no payment of PLB is made for the period of unauthorised absence/ 
suspension  till its regularisation;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
129 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) the wages  per day of individual employee have been correctly assessed as 
per extant  orders, taking into acco unt the prescribed  ceiling on monthly  
wages . 
IV) the payment of PLB to be made only for actual period in case of 
employees  retired /quitting service  during the year.  
V) the officials promoted to gazetted  cadre  during the year, only the period 
of their service  as non -gazetted  is considered for assessing the PLB.  
Advances to Railway  servants – After the implementation  of the 
recommendation of the 7th CPC, only two advances  viz. House  Building Advance  
(HBA ) and Computer  Advanc e are admissible to the railway  servants. Other 
advances such as Motor  Car Advance, Motor Cycle /Scooter Advance, Bicycle 
and Warm Clothing  Advance have been abolished  (RB’s letter No. 
F(E)Spl./2008/ADB.3/6(7th CPC) dated 07.02.2017  and RB’s letter No. 
F(E)Spl./2008/ADB.3/6(7th CPC) dated 05.12.2017 ).  
House  Building Advance  (HBA ) – This is admissible to a permanent  railway  
servant and a temporary railway  servant with 05  years continuous service  for 
construction / purchase  of house /flat21.  
The maximum  amount of advance is 34 months basi c pay subject to a maximum  
of Rs .25 lakh or cost  of the house /flat or amount according to repaying capacity 
whichever is least for construction /purchase  of new  house/flat. The maximum  
amount for expa nsion of the existing house is Rs. 10 lakh  or the cost  or the cost  
of expansion whichever is the least. The rate  of interest  for HBA  from financial  
year 2017 -18 onwards is 8.50 per cent which would be reviewed every three years 
to be notified in consultation with the Ministry  of Finance . The cost  of the house 
to be buil t/purchase  (excluding the cost  of plot) should not exceed 139 times of 
the basic pay  of the employee subject to maximum  of Rs. 1 crore. This limit can 
be relaxed by 25 per cent by the Head of Departm ent on the merits of the 
individual case. The house/flat has to be mortgaged on the behalf of President  of 
India  and insured till the recovery the principal amount as well as interest  (RB’s 
letter No. F(E)Spl./2008/ADB.3/6(7th CPC) dated 05.12.2017  read with Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. I.17011/11(4)/2016 -H-III dated 
09.11.2017 ). 
During audit  of cases of HBA  sanctioned  to the railway  servants, the 
following should be see n that :– 
I) the railway  servant applying for HBA  is eligible as per the laid  down 
norms . 
II) outright purchase  of ready built flat/house  is not done from private  
individuals.  
                                                           
21 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. I.17011/11(4)/2016 -H-III dated 09.11.2017  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
130 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) the amount of advance sanctioned  is as per the prescribed  limits and 
repaying capacity of the railway  servant.  
IV) the interest  on HBA  is assessed on the prevailin g/revised rates if any 
notified by the Ministry  of Finance . 
V) the cost  ceiling limit of the built/purchase  house  is not exceeding the 
prescribed  limit except rela xation up  to 25 per cent by the HoD on the 
merits of the case.  
VI) the house /flat is mortgaged on the behalf of President  of India  within three 
months of the drawl of advance and all the relevant papers are submitt ed 
to the loan sanctioning authority . 
VII) the house /flat has been insured with the recognized  institutions  as 
approved  by Insurance  Regulatory and Develo pment  Authority  (IRDA) 
for not less than the amount of advance and that the policy  is renewed 
every year.  
VIII) the recovery of the amount of advance and interest  is done continuously.  
IX) the am ount of interest  has been correctly calculated.  
Personal  Computer  (PC) Advance  – The railway  servants can be granted 
advance for purchase  of comp uter for not more than Rs. 50,000  or the actual price 
of PC whichever is lower. The computer advance is allowed for maximum  of five 
times in the entire service  of the railway  servant ( RB’s letter No. 
F(E)Spl/2016/ADV.4/1(7th CPC) dated 07.02.2017 ). 
The following audit  checks  should be exercised of the cases for purchase  of 
personal computer  by railway  servant - 
I) A railway  servant who had earlier drawn computer  advance, is granted a 
subsequent compu ter advance after of a period of three years from the 
date of purchase  of the earlier advance.  
II) Computer  purchase  has been mortgaged as the name of President  of India  
in GFR  Form 24 with necessary amendments.  
III) The advance is not paid for payment of custom duty  for the purchase  of 
PC. 
IV) The monthly  installments  of recovery of principal amount and interest  are 
made regularly.  
V) The amount of interest  has been correctly calculated.  
7.12 Setting up and maintenance  of Welfare  Activities  
Staff  Benefit  Fund  (SBF) – (See Chapter 8 of R -I) 
The Staff  Benefit  Fund  is maintained at Zonal  Headquarters  level/Divisional / 
Workshops  for the benefit of non -gazetted  staff. The Staff Benefit Committee  
constituted at Zonal Headquarters leve l is presided over by the Principal  Chief  
Personnel  Officer, at Divisional level by Sr. Divisional Personnel Officer and at 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
131 
For internal use of IA&AD  Workshop , it is presided over by the Sr. Scale  Personnel Officer/Works  
Manager /Assistant  Works Manager ( Para-807 and  808 R -I).  
The fund is financed from – 
I) receipts  from fines,  
II) all receipts  from forfeited Provident  Fund  bonuses other than those of 
gazette Railway  servants.  
III) an annual  grant  from the Railway  revenues at a per capita rate  as 
prescribed  in respect of each non -gazetted  Railway employee employed 
on the Railway (other than in a Capital  construction  project) at the end of 
the previous year.  
IV) unpaid  wages  beyond three years, and  
V) 50 per cent of expenditure  incurred by the Railways  on grant  of 
scholarship of children  of Railway  employees  during the preceding year. 
(Para-804 and 805 R -I)  
VI) Interest at prescribed rate shall be credited on the balance at the credit of 
the Fund lying with the Government and will be taken in reduction of the 
annual contribution from the revenues of the railway (Para-804 and 805 
R-I) 
During audit  of accounts  of Staff  Benefit  Fund , it is to be seen that - 
I) no part of the fund has been used for the benefit of any Gazetted  Officers 
except as provided in rule 805 (1) ( Para-803 R -I). 
II) distribution  of annual  per capita grant  has been made as per Railway  
Board ’s orders from time  to time  (Para-805 R -I). 
III) accounts  of the staff  benefit fund has been monitored and internally 
checked by the office of the FA&CAO  (Para-811 R -I). 
IV) annual  report on the working of the SBF has been sent by GM  to the 
Railway  Board  (Para-812 R -I) 
V) no fund under the heads education, sports activities and scouts activities 
has been re -appropriated by the Central  SBF Committee  (Para-805 note -
4 R-I and  RB ’s letter No. E(W)2008/FU -1/2 dated 29.01.2009).  
VI) re-appropriation  under other heads is not exceeded 25 per cent of the 
amount ( Para-805 note -4 R-I and RB ’s letter No. E(W)2008/FU -1/2 dated 
29.01.2009).  
VII) the sanction s to expenditure  from the fund should have been made for an 
object covered  by the Railway  Board  policy  as well as by the local  rules . 
Allotment  of railway  quarters – The allotment of quarters to gazetted  staff are 
control led by the GM  office at the Headquarters  of Zonal  Railway  and on the 
Divisions  by the DRMs. For non -gazetted  staff, railway  provides residential  
quarters as per the allotment decided by the Housing Allotment Committee . In 
certain cases, out of turn allotment of quarters is also considered ( RB’s letter No. 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
132 
For internal use of IA&AD  E(G)2008 -QR1 -8 dated 28.04.2009 ). Subletting of railway  quarter is not 
permitted without the approval  of the DRM s and HoDs. Staff  violating these 
orders are to be charged market rent  or the penal rent ( RB’s letter No. 
E(G)79/ RN-2-117 dated 09.04.1980 ). 
During the check of allotment of quarters , the following should be seen that - 
I) the quarter allotted to a particular officer is occupied by him and not left 
vacant;  
II) if it is allotted to any other officer there is  no loss  of re nt on account  of 
such allotment;  
III) cases of quarters  remain ed vacant for unduly long period have been 
examined and appropriate  action  taken by the Administration ; 
IV) special  orders regarding penal rent  etc., are  implemented wherever 
warranted;   
V) subletting of railway  quarters  is done only wit h the approval  of the 
DRMs/HoDs; and  
VI) out of turn allotments are made only in the specified cases.  
Co-operative  societies - 
Following co -operative societies  are working in the Railways - [Chapter 23 of 
IREM ] 
I) Consumer  Co-operative  Societies - Consume r Co -operative Societies 
means the retail societies  to cater the needs of their members at reasonable 
prices with a minimum element of profit . The work  relating to 
organisation , supervision  routine inspection , etc., of consumer co -
operative societies and giving guidance  to them and developing their 
activities is the  responsibility of the Railway  Administrations. This work  
will be under the overall control  of the Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officers 
at the headquarters  and they will ensure necessary co -ordination  in the 
divis ions through the Divisional  Personnel officers who in turn should 
keep a close watch on the work  of the welfare  inspectors whose one of the 
essential duties will be to look after the co -operative societies.  
II) Cooperative Credit  Societies / Banks - The main object of Co -operative  
Credit Societies/ Banks is to encourage habit of thrift among members 
rather than provided loans  to them at reasonable rate  of interest . 
III) Co-operative  Housing Societies  – Railway  servants or Co -operative 
Housing Societies consisting of such Railway servants a re eligible for 
loan under low income  group housing schemes for construction  of houses.  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
133 
For internal use of IA&AD  During audit  of records pertaining to the above societies /banks as 
maintained in  the Personnel  Department , it should be seen that - 
I) one welfare  inspector has been nominated for attending all items of work  
relating to that particular Consumer  Co-operative  Society (Para  2303 of 
IREM ), 
II) monthly  report on Consumer  Co-operative  Society is submitted to 
Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer by the nominated Welfare  Inspectors  
through Divisional  Person nel Officer (Para  2303 of IREM ), 
III) quarterly reports  on Consumer  Co-operative  Society are submitted to the 
Railway  Board (Para  2303 of IREM ), 
IV) retired  or ex -railway  servants are not permitted to become members of the 
Consumer  Co-operative  Society or to continue as such beyond a limited  
period (Para  2306 of IREM ). 
V) subsidy granted to Consumer  Co-operative  Society is not more than half 
the administrative and establishment charges  as admissible under the rules  
(Para  2309 of IREM ). 
VI) rent for accommodation provided to the societies  has been recovered at 
prescribed  rates (Para  2313 , 2314, 2341 ) of IREM . 
VII) prescribed  charges  have been recovered from co -opera tive credit  
society/banks for recoveries  of loan made through salary bills , in case no 
welfare  fund is set up by the society ( Para 2342 of IREM ). 
VIII) Privilege  passes  and Privilege Ticket Orders for the employees  of the 
societies  have been issued as scale laid  down in Schedule  VII of Railway  
Servant (Pass ) Rules  1986.  
Other staff  welfare  activities – Staff  welfare is one of the functions  of the 
Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer (PCPO ) at Zonal  Headquarters  who has 
assisted by Dy.  CPO  (Labour  & Welfare ), Welfare Inspector , Personnel Inspec tor 
etc. for looking after day to day work  in this regard. At divisions  and workshops  
it is handled by Sr. DPO/SPO  assisted by APO  and the team of Welfare Inspector 
and Personnel Insp ector.  
Major  activities dealt with by the Staff  Welfare  Organisation  (other than staff  
benefit fund) are provision of railway  institutes and clubs, schooling fa cilities, 
grant -in-Aid, educational  assistance, reimbursement  of hostel subsidy, provision 
of holiday homes/convalescent homes, scouts and gui des, canteens , handicraft 
center /vocation al traini ng center s etc.  
During check of record maintained by the Staff  Welfare  Organisation , it 
should be seen that - 
I) the Welfare  Inspectors  and Personn el Inspectors carry out the specified 
duties from time  to time . 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
134 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) bye laws  of the institute/club  are in line  with the extant  instructions , issued 
from time  to time  by the Railway  Board . 
III) railway  institutes bear the cost  of specified items.  
IV) hiring of railway  institutes club  premises by outsiders from private  
function is permitted as per provisions incorporated in the bye laws . 
V) amount collected from hiring of the institutes is properly accounted for.  
VI) grants -in-aid, if any, sanctioned  by the GM  to non -railway  schools is only 
for those such school which is recognised by the State  Government . 
VII) accommodation of handicraft center s is made in any spare railway  
building  and no new  building  is constructed for this purpose without prior 
approval  of Railway  Board .  
VIII) recovery of electricity and water  charg es from the handicraft center s 
housed in railway  institute are being borne by the institute itself.  
(RB’s letter No. E(W)2004/1S -1/2   dated 12.10.2006 ) 
7.13 Pension , Post  retirement  benefits and Grievance  Redressal  of Pensioners  
Every railway  servant shall retire from service  in the afternoon of the last day of 
the month  in which he attains the age of 60 years provided that a railway  servant 
whose date of birth is first of the month  shall retire from service  in the afternoon 
of the last day of the preceding month  on attaining the age of 60 years. The date 
of birth on which of railway  servant attains the age of 60 years shall be determined 
with r eference to the date of birth is recorded in terms of Rule  225 R -I read with 
administrative instructions  there under. No railway  servant shall be granted 
extension in service  beyond the age or retirement  of 60 years. ( Para-1801 R -II 
and RB’s letter No. E(P&A)I/98/ RT -6 dated 1 4.05.1998, 22.07.1998 and 
31.08.1998 ). 
The retirement  of railway  servant is done by the following modes - 
I) Retirement  on superannuation ( Para-1801 R -II). 
II) Retirement  due to medical  invalidation.  
III) Retirement  ordered in public  interest  (Para-1802 and 1803 R -II). 
IV) Premature /voluntary  retirement  (Para-1802 and 1803 R -II). 
Retirement  on superannuation means a railway  servant retiring on attaining t he 
age of 60 years. Retirement due to medical  invalidation is due to of railway  
servant becoming medically  decategorised for whom alternate employment is not 
found. Premature  retirement  means the retirement  of an employee ahead of 
attaining the age of superannuation either voluntarily or due to an order passed as 
a penalty  under the rules , by giving a notice of three months  or pay  and 
allowances  of three months in lieu of notice.  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
135 
For internal use of IA&AD  Pensions payable to the railway  servant broadly fall in the following categories - 
I) Superannuation  pension ( Para-51 Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 
1993 ). 
II) Retiring  pensi on (Para-52 Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993 ). 
III) Invalid  pension ( Para-55 Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993 ). 
IV) Compensation  pension ( Para-63 Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 
1993 ). 
V) Compulsory retirement  pension ( Para-64 Railway  Services  (Pension ) 
Rules , 1993 ). 
VI) Compassionate  allowance ( Para-65 Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 
1993 ).  
VII) Family  pension ( Rule  75 of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993 ,RB’s 
letter No. 2016/F(E)III/1(1)/8 dated 12.08.2016 ) and  ( Rule 75(4)(i)(a) 
and (b) of Railway Services (Pension) Rules, 1993 ). 
Commutation  of pension – A railway  servant is entitled to commute for a 
lumpsum  payment up  to 40 per cent. No railway  servant against whom any 
departmental  or any jud icial proceeding as refer to in Rule  9 of the Railway  
Pension  Rules  has been instituted before the date of his retirement  or the 
pensioner against whom such proceedings are insti tuted after the date of his 
retirement , shall be eligible to commute of fraction of his provisional pension 
authorised under Rule 10 of the Railway Pension Rules  or the pension, as the case 
may be, during the pendency of such proceedings  (Rule 5 of Chapter -II of Part -
II of Railway Services  (Pension) Rules, 1993 ). 
Retirement  gratuity or death gratuity – In the case of a railway  servant, who 
has completed five years’ qualifying  service  and has become eligible of service  
gratuity or pension under Rule  69 of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993 , 
shall, on his retiremen t, be granted retirement  gratuity equal to one -fourth of his 
emoluments for each completed six monthly  period of qualifying service  subject 
to a maximum  of sixteen and on e-half times the emoluments and there shall be 
no ceiling on reckonable emoluments for calculating the gratuity. The maximum  
of retirement  gratui ty and death gratuity shall be Rs.  20 lakh. The ceiling on 
gratuity will inc rease by 25 per cent whenever the dearness  allowance increases 
by 50 per cent of the basic pay .    
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
136 
For internal use of IA&AD  The rates for payment of death gratuity are as under - 
Length of qualifying  service   Rate  of Death  Gratuity  
Less than one year  2 times of monthly  emoluments  
One year or more but less than 5 
years  6 times of monthly  emoluments  
5 years or more but less than 11 
years  12 times of monthly  emoluments  
11 years or more but less than 
20 years  20 times of monthly  emoluments  
20 years or more  Half month ’s emoluments for every 
completed six monthly  period of 
qualifyi ng service  subject to a 
maximum  of 33 times of emoluments.  
(Rule  70 of R ailway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993  and RB’s letter No . 
2016/F(E)III/1(1)/8 dated 12.08.2016 ) 
During audit  of pension cases, it is to be seen that - 
I) the qualifying  service  is correctly arrived at with reference to service  
record.  
II) the service  records and leave  accounts  are properly maintained.  
III) necessary certificate  regarding service  verification  is recorded annually.  
IV) statement showing the pay  drawn during the last ten months of service  is 
checked with service  record and leave  account  to verify the correctness of 
the emoluments of the ten months period.  
V) the pay  drawn in the pay  certificate  and the outstanding  dues etc. are 
correctly reflected.  
VI) in case of retirement  other than superannuation, the name of retired  
personnel has bee n deleted from on roll  system  of AIMS .  
VII) a remark is given in the service  record that the pension and other 
retirement  benefits have been passed for payment.  
VIII) the foreign  service  contribution  for the period of foreign  service  has been 
duly recovered.  
IX) if per cent of pension to be commuted  results in fraction of a rupee, such 
fraction h as been ignored for the purpose of commutation . 
X) while auditing  cases of commutation  of pension, provision contained in 
Part-II of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993  may be borne in mind.  
XI) while auditing  cases of family  pension, provision contained in Part-I 
Chapters IX and X of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993  may be 
borne in mind.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
137 
For internal use of IA&AD  XII) while auditing  cases of retirement  gratuity or death gratuity, provisions 
contained in Part-I Chapter VI of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993  
may be borne in mind.  
XIII) full amount of death/retirement  facilities is withheld for non -vacation of 
railway  quarter after superannuation and other cases of cessation of 
service  (Rule  16 of Railway  Services  (Pension ) Rules , 1993  and RB ’s 
letter No. E(G) 2000  QR 1 -23 RBE  dated 01.06.2001).  
7.14 Audit  of Law Charges  
Law charges are the charges paid as fee to the Advocates, Arbitrators, Govt. 
pleaders etc. The record maintained by the Accounts  Office to show the total 
charges incurred for each case should be consulted in this connection.  
During Audit  of Law Charges, it should be seen that -  
I) The fees and other charges claimed by Government  pleaders, ad vocates 
etc. are in accordance with the scales fixed if any, by the Administration.  
II) The financial  power of the officer sanctioning such charges, in a particular 
case, has not been exceeded.  
List of items to be seen during ins pection  of Personnel  Department  
Railway  Board  Office  (Staff  Directorate ) 
I) Maintenance  of reser vation  rosters . 
II) Identification  of posts  for recruitment  and submission of demand to 
Staff  Selection  Commission . 
III) Appointment  on compassionate  ground , against sports quota and on 
cultural and artistic     talents.  
IV) Conducting of DPCs for promotion . 
V) Creation  and continuance of wo rk charged post . 
VI) Scrutiny  of the system  of delegation of powers.  
VII) Modified  Assured Career  Progression Scheme  (MACPS ). 
VIII) Last Pay  Certificates (LPCs)  
IX) Accountal  of expenditure  on establishment to correct head  of account . 
X) Check  of Salary  and other Allowances . 
XI) Review of di sciplinary cases against employees , posting in service  
book and payment of Subsistence Allowance .    
XII) Foreign  service /deputations.  
XIII) Engagement  of Bungalow  Peon.  
XIV)  Court  cases against Railway . 
XV) Audit  of sanctions . 
XVI)  Medical  Attendance  Bills . 
XVII)  Recovery  of quart er rent , water  and electricity charges . 
XVIII)  Admissibility of Qualification  Pay and Non  Practicing Allowance . 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
138 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIX)  Loans and Advances  to railw ay servants and recovery thereof.  
XX) Payment of Productivity  Linked Bonus  (PLB).  
XXI)  Recovery  of Government  share of fee received by railway  servants.  
XXII)  Attendanc e Register /Bio-metric Attendance Report  for the month  
selected.  
XXIII)  Casual  Leave  and Restricted Holiday  register . 
XXIV)  Reconci liation  of items 22 and 23 above.  
XXV)  Office  orders for promotions, actual date of taking over higher duties 
and the postings in the Service  Book.  
XXVI)  Review of leave  account  and p osting of sanctioned  applications  of 
leave  in the leave  account .  
XXVII)  Regularisation of absence before preparation of pay  bills (for the 
month  selected).  
XXVIII)  Tracing of attendance  in pay  bill with absentee statement.  
XXIX)  Compliance  with Staff  Office  Orders.  
XXX)  Verification  of Memorandum  of Differences (MoD) Statement 
generated by AIMS  with the entries in the service  books . 
XXXI)  Check  of fixation  of pay . 
XXXII)  Check  of T.A. Bills  with the Attendance  Register  or Tour  Programme . 
XXXIII)  Re-engagement  of retired  staff on daily remuneration  basis.  
XXXIV)  Check  of Stationery Account  
XXXV)  Check  of Stamp  Account . 
XXXVI)  Check  of Inventory  of Dead  Stock . 
XXXVII)  Check  of grant  and a vailing of in lieu leave  (Compensatory Casual  
Leave ). 
XXXVIII)  Check  of Settlement  cases.  
XXXIX)  Check  of Passes  and P.T.Os  accounts  including custody of blank 
passes  and P.T.O.s books . 
XL) Check  of Miscellaneous  Receipts , if any, with the office.  
XLI) Check  of uniform  allowance.  
XLII)  Review of Cadre  and Scale  Check  Register  and tracing with pay  rolls.  
XLIII)  Review of important files , if any (To be seen from index  register ). 
XLIV)  Imprest  Cash  account  and Pay  Order Books . 
XLV)  Contribution  and Grants  to Institutes  and Sports  clubs.  
XLVI)  Check  of annu al certificate  for verification  of pensionable service  in 
the service  books . 
XLVII)  Superannuation  lists. 
XLVIII)  Proper  maintenanc e of index  register  of cases including secret files .  
XLIX)  Library  account  of books  including codes  and publications.  
L) Log Books and Petrol Account . 
LI) Review of Expenditure  on Independence  Day, Republic  Day, and 
Railway  Week etc.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
139 
For internal use of IA&AD  LII) Hospitality  Fund . 
LIII) Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes.  
LIV) Review of last Inspection  Reports  issued by Audit  and Accounts . 
LV) Review of expenditure  on T.A. a nd entertainment of the members of 
the Railway  Users Committee . 
LVI) Report  of Losses.  
LVII)  Accounts  of holiday homes and children  camps.  
LVIII)  Accounts  of staff  Benefit  Fund . 
Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer/ Divisional  Railway  Manager  (Personnel 
Branch )/ Dy.  Chief Personnel Officer (W&S) a nd Construction  
I) Maintenance  of reservation  rosters . 
II) Identification  of posts  for recruitment  and submission of demand to 
Headquarters . 
III) Appointment  on compassionate  ground , against sports quota and on 
cultural and artistic talents.  
IV) Verification  of panel received from RRB /RRC  for new  appointment . 
V) Conducting of DPCs for promotion . 
VI) Creation  and continuance of work  charged post . 
VII) Scruti ny of the system  of delegation of powers.  
VIII) Provision  of alternative jobs  to medically  decategorized staff . 
IX) Modified  Assured Career  Progression Scheme  (MACPS ). 
X) Last Pay  Certificates (LPCs)  
XI) Accountal  of expenditure  on establishment to correct head  of account . 
XII) Check  of Salary  and other Allowances . 
XIII) Review of disciplinary cases against employees , posting in service  
book and payment of Subsistence Allowance .    
XIV)  Foreign  service /deputations.  
XV) Engagement  of Bungalow  Peon.  
XVI)  Court  cases against Railway . 
XVII)  Audit  of sanctions . 
XVIII)  Medical  Attenda nce Bills . 
XIX)  Allotment  of quarters  to railway  staff, recovery of rent , water  and 
electricity charges . 
XX) Admissibility o f Qualification  Pay and Non  Practicing Allowance . 
XXI)  Loans and Advances  to railway  servants and recovery thereof.  
XXII)  Payment of Productivity  Linked Bonus  (PLB).  
XXIII)  Recovery  of Government  share of fee received by railway  servants.  
XXIV)  Attendance  Register /Bio-metric Attendance Report  for the month  
selected.  
XXV)  Casual  Leave  and Restricted Holiday  register . 
XXVI)  Reconciliation  of items 24 and 25 above.  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
140 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXVII)  Office  orders for promotio ns, actual date of taking over higher duties 
and the postings in the Service  Book.  
XXVIII)  Review of leave  account  and posting of sanctioned  applications  of 
leave  in the leave  account .  
XXIX)  Regularisation of absence before pay  for the period is charged in the 
pay bills (for the month  selected).  
XXX)  Tracing of attendance  in pay bill with absentee statement.  
XXXI)  Compliance  with Staff  Office  Orders.  
XXXII)  Verification  of Memorandum  of Differences (MoD) Statement 
generated by AIMS  with the entries in the service  books . 
XXXIII)  Check  of fixation  of pay . 
XXXIV)  Check  of T.A. Bills  with the Attendance  Register  or Tour  Programme . 
XXXV)  Re-engagement  of retired  staff on daily remuneration  basis.  
XXXVI)  Check  of Stationery Account  
XXXVII)  Check  of Stamp  Account . 
XXXVIII)  Check  of Inventory  of Dead  Stock . 
XXXIX)  Check  of grant  and availing of in lieu leave  (Compensatory Casual  
Leave ). 
XL) Check  of Settlement  cases.  
XLI) Check  of Passes  and P.T.Os  accounts  including custody of blank 
passes  and P.T.O.s books . 
XLII)  Check  of Miscellaneous  Receipts , if any, with the office.  
XLIII)  Check  of uniform  allowance.  
XLIV)  Review of Cadre  and Scale  Check  Register  and tracing with pay  rolls.  
XLV)  Payments under Workmen ’s Compensation  Act. 
XLVI)  Review of important files , if any (To be seen from index  register ). 
XLVII)  Imprest  Cash  account  and Pay  Order Books . 
XLVIII)  Contribution  and Grants  to Railway  Schools /private  schools, 
Institutes  and Sports  clubs.  
XLIX)  Check  of annual  certificate  for verification  of pensionable service  in 
the service  books . 
L) Superannuation  lists. 
LI) Proper  maintenance  of index  register  of cases including secret files . 
LII) Library  accou nt of books  including codes  and publications.  
LIII) Log Books  and Petrol Account . 
LIV) Review of Expenditure  on Independence  Day, Republic  Day, and 
Railway  Week etc.  
LV) Hospitality  Fund  
LVI) Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes.  
LVII)  Review of last Inspection  Reports  issue d by Audit  and Accounts . 
LVIII)  Review of expenditure  on T.A. and entertainment of the members of 
the Railway  Users Divisional  Committee . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
141 
For internal use of IA&AD  LIX) Report  of Losses sent to Headquarters . 
LX) Accounts  of holiday homes and children  camps.  
LXI) Accounts  of staff  Benefit  Fund . 
Railway  Recrui tment  Board  
I) Check  of Salary  and other Allowances . 
II) Review of leave  account  and posting of sanctioned  applications  of 
leave  in the leave  account . 
III) Bio-metric Attendance  Report /Attendance Register  and casual  leave  
Accounts  Register.  
IV) Passes  and P.T.Os . Account .  
V) Card  Passes  movement register . 
VI) Misc . cash  collections.  
VII) Stationery Registers.  
VIII) Service  Postage Stamp  Account . 
IX) Tools  and Plant  Register . 
X) Stores  Ledgers . 
XI) T.A. Bills .  
XII) Sanctioned  strength . 
XIII) Advice  Notes /Issue  Notes/Credit  Notes.  
XIV)  Sale of Waste  Paper.  
XV) Allotment  of quarters  to railway  staff, recovery of rent , water  and 
electricity charges . 
XVI)  Imprest  Account . 
XVII)  Receipt  and accountal of fee received for examination.   
XVIII)  Payments to Outsourced Agency  for setting of and evaluation  of 
Question  papers.  
XIX)  Complaints , if any, and disposal  thereof.  
XX) Hire charges  for the building  of Rail way Recruitment  Board . 
XXI)  Review of Last Inspection  reports  of Audit  and Accounts .  
XXII)  Honorarium  to persons deputed for conduc ting the examinations.  
XXIII)  Accountal  submitted by the Examination  Conducting Units  viz. 
Divisions  etc. in respect of money given to them.  
Railway  Recruitment  Cell 
I) Bio-metric Attendance  Report /Attendance Register  and casual  leave  
Accounts  Register.  
II) Card  Passes  movement regi ster. 
III) Misc . cash  collections.  
IV) Stationery Registers.  
V) Service  Postage Stamp  Account . 
VI) Tools  and Plant  Register . 
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
142 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) Sanctioned  strength . 
VIII) Advice  Notes /Issue  Notes/Credit  Notes.  
IX) Sale of Waste  Paper.  
X) Imprest  Account . 
XI) Review of Importan t cases.  
XII) Receipt  and accountal of fee received for examination.   
XIII) Payments to Outsourced Agency  for setting of and evaluation  of 
Question  papers.  
XIV)  System  of Selection  including physical  test, if any.  
XV) Complaints , if any  and disposal  thereof.  
XVI)  Hire charges  for the building  of Railway  Recruitment  Cell.  
XVII)  Review of Last Inspection  reports  of Audit  and Accounts . 
XVIII)  Honorarium  to persons deputed for conducting the examinations.  
XIX)  Accountal  submitted by the Examination  Conducting Units  viz. 
Divisions  etc. in respect of money given to them.  
Railway  Schools  
I) School fee accounts . 
II) Tools  and Plant  including furniture  supplied to teachers.  
III) Account  of books . 
IV) Review of school grants.  
V) Check  of Salary  and other Allowances .  
VI) Stamp  and stationery account . 
VII) Imprest  account , if any.  
VIII) Clothing  account , if any.  
IX) Scholar attendance  registers . 
X) Recoveries  of fines for absence and late  payment of fee.  
XI) Free studentship and half rate  fees. 
XII) Charges  for transfer certificate . 
XIII) Sanctioned  strength . 
XIV)  Remittance  of cash  collections.  
XV) School budget  and general financial  position.  
XVI)  System  of accounts  regarding submission of returns  to Inspector  of 
schools for purpose of Local  Government  grants.  
XVII)  Income  and expenses  regarding hostel, stationery, games and medical  
expenses . 
XVIII)  Reconciliation  of school accounts  with Divisional  Accounts  Office  
books /Bank  Statement.  
XIX)  Passes  and P.T.Os . 
XX) Leave  Accou nts and service  records (including verification  of service  
of pensionable staff ). 
XXI)  Attendance  register  and casual  leave  account . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
143 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXII)  Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes.  
XXIII)  Review of accounts  of various funds maintained.  
XXIV)  Review of last inspection  reports  both of Audi t and Accounts . 
XXV)  Review of annual  reports  of the school.  
XXVI)  Cash  Book.  
XXVII)  Library  account . 
XXVIII)  Review of Tally  books  maintained in r espect of items procured for 
laboratories  of physics, chemistry, biology sports material , computer , 
music etc.  
XXIX)  Arrangement for extra activities viz. engagement  of teachers for 
comput er, training , photography etc.  
Training  Centre  (Personnel ) 
I) Accounts  of books  and magazines . 
II) System  of purcha se of books  and magazines  and newspapers . 
III) System  of attendance  of apprentices . 
IV) Gate  passes . 
V) Review of expe nses in connection with the training . 
VI) Recovery  of cost  of training  from the apprentices  who resign during the 
period of apprenticeship.  
VII) Review of agreement s executed by the apprentices . 
VIII) Sports  accounts . 
IX) Review of various accounts  maintained by the school.  
X) Result  of Refresher  courses.  
XI) Utilization of facilitie s created in the school.  
  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
144 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure -'A' 
List of Reports  generated by Human  Resource module  of AIMS  
Cadre  Report  
Leave  
Leave  Debit Report  
Leave  Credit  
Leave  Account  
Annual  Leave  Account  
Leave  Statement  
Pay Roll Report  - CMS  Comparison  Sheet  with IPAS  
OT Over  Payment Report  
OT Arrear Report  
Leave  Encash Report  
Last Wage Report  
Arrears Of Allowances  
Salary  Bill/Pay Slips 
Salary  Report  
Payslip In PDF  
Payslip in Cheque  
Bilingual Payslip  
Pay Roll Report  
Last Pay  Certificate  
Quarterly Report  
CO6  
Salary  Projection  
General  Report  
Salary  Process Status  
Employee Earnings  
Incoming/Outgoing  
Appointment  Report  
Electricity  Report  
NPS Report  
CUG  Report  
Bio data Report  
Pay mode Wise Report  
Consolidated  Debit Credit  
Retirement  List  
Court  Recovery  Report  
Court  DD Report  
Staff  Cost Report  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
145 
For internal use of IA&AD  Staff  Cost Scale  Wise  
Statement  
Employee Master  Data  For Rly Board  
Print Master  Report  
List of employees  Regular  Salary  Paid for the month  
NHA Report  
NDA Report  
KMA Report  
OT Report  
TA 
Disallow List  
TA/Contg List  
TA/Contg Month  
TA/Contg Passed  
Child  Education  
Detail Report  
Summary Report  
Income  Tax 
Salary /Savings Data  
Quarterly Income  Tax  
STATEMENT 24Q  
Annual  Income  Tax  
Income  Tax Report  
Pay Review  
As drawn Should be Report  (PC6)  
Pay Review Report  (PC7)  
Bonus  
Wage Per Day  
Wage Per Day Status  
Bonus  Bill (Final)  
Bonus  Draft  Bill  
Bank  Statement  
Bank  Statement  
Recovery  Report  
DA Arrear Statement  
Supplementar y 
Supplement  Report  
Cash  Pay Advance  Report  
Pay mode Report  
Bill Report  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
146 
For internal use of IA&AD  Bill Status  
PF 
Reconciliation  BU Wise  
Reconciliation  PF Wise  
Reconciliation  Annual  (Bill Unit)  
Reconciliation  Annual  (Emp)  
Reconciliation  Annual  Yearly  
Reconciliation  PF-BOOKS Annual  
PF Debit Credit  Register  
PF Check  Sheet  
PF-Clear balance  
Salary  Report (PF-NIL)  
Suspense  
OB Report  
Passbook Printing  
PF Ledger  Card  
PF Register  
Settlement  Register  
PF Balance  
PF Settlement  Bill  
PFA Bill  
Books  Reconciliation  
IN/OUT Report  
Transferred Emp Report  
Ledger  Report  
Ledger  Report  (For Emp)  
Bill Status Report  
Exception  Reports  
Pay Roll Report  
Retirement  Report  
Allowance  Monitoring  
Exceptional Sal Payment  
New  Join/In Out AU  
Exception  reports  from Salary  Paid  
Exception  reports  from Employee Bio -Data  
List of Employees  to whom Salary  Paid in the Month  
 
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
147 
For internal use of IA&AD  Abbreviations used  
I) DG- Director  General  
II) RHS - Railway  Health  Services  
III) AM- Additional  Member  
IV) Pers. - Personnel  
V) IR- Industrial  Relation  
VI) PED - Principal  Executive  Director  
VII) ED – Executive  Director  
VIII) G – General  
IX) Estt.- Establishment  
X) Res. – Reservation  
XI) Trg. & MPP – Training  & Man Pow er Planning  
XII) GC – Gazetted  Cadre  
XIII) RRB  – Railway  Recruitment  Board  
XIV)  N – Non Gazetted  
XV) EDE – Executive  Director  Establishment  
XVI)  PC – Personal  Computer  
XVII)  Rep. – Representation  
XVIII)  W – Welfare  
XIX)  LL – Labour  Laws  
XX) JDE – Joint  Director  Establishment  
  
Chapter 4  – Audit of Personnel  Department  
 
148 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
149 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER 5- AUDIT OF MEDICAL DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  (IR), following the spirit of Welfare  State , pursue a policy  
of improving the working and living conditions of employees . The role of 
Medical  and Health  Department  can be appreciated in  view of the need to have 
fit and healthy employees  for efficient railway  operations . The Indian Railways  
(IR) has adopted the Mission  Statement  - "Total patient satisfaction through 
humane approach and shared commitment of every single doctor and 
paramedic to provide quality  health  care us ing modern  and cost  effective 
techniques  & technologies ".  
The mission statement enjoins upon the medical  department of the Railways  to 
provide adequate curative,  promo tive  and preventive  health  services through 
effective parameters  and adequacy of departmental  supervision, assess adequacy 
of manpower  issues, financial  planning  and efficient fund management  in order 
to meet the organizational targets ; provide prompt relief  to passengers  injured in 
railway  accident s; attend to passengers injured or taken seriously ill in trains  or 
at railway  stations ; review steps for sanitation , hygiene , cleanliness , safe  drinking 
water  and food, scientific  disposal  of hospital  waste  etc. 
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF MEDICAL 
DEPARTMENT  
The Medical  Department  at Railway  Board  level is headed by the Dir ector  
General  (Railway Health  Services ) and assisted by Executive  
Directors /Directors.  
At Zonal  Railway  level, the departmen t is headed by the Principal  Chief  Medical  
Director  (PCMD ), who is assisted by Chief Health  Director (CHD ), Addl. Chief 
Health Director (ACHD ), Addl. Chief Medical Director (ACMD ) and Dy . CMDs  
at headquarters  level and Medical Director who heads Central  Hospital , who in 
turn is assisted by ACHDs, Sr. DMOs /DMOs/ADMOs .  Chief Medical Suptt. 
(CMS ) assisted by ACMS heads the department at Divisional  level.  
Sr. DMO /DMO/ADMOs provide medical  attendance  to sta ff in Divisional 
Railway Hospitals/Sub -divisional  Hospitals/Health Units .  
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
150 
For internal use of IA&AD  Ministry  of Railways  
(CRB /CEO , Railway Board  ) 
3. ROLES  OF THE DEPARTMENT  
(Ref: Para 3.4 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines ) 
3.1 At Railway  Board  level  
I) Framing / interpretation of rules  and making suitable policy  changes  
II) Approval  of Proposals  
III) Sanctioning of estimates   
IV) Funds  provisions  
V) Control  and Supervision  
3.2 At Zonal  Level  
I) Ensuring efficient working o f medical  and health  operations  of Zone as a 
whole  
II) Preparation  and compilation  of budgetary  requirements  
III) Coordination  and compi lation  of Annual  Works  programme  and getting 
approval  for the same.  
IV) Approval  and sanction of proposals and estimates  prepared by the Cent ral 
Hospital / Divisions  
V) Control  over expenditure  – to incur expenditure  within the limits of 
financial  powers and within budget  allotment.  
VI) Reimbursement  of medical  expenses . 
VII) Manpower  planning   
VIII) Monitoring  of various health  and family  welfare  programmes  
IX) Constitution  of Medical  Boards and matters related to Appeals  
X) Recognition of hospitals and laboratories  
XI) Monitoring  of drinking water  quality  
DG (RHS)
Dt.e Gen of Health 
and F.W.
P.E.D (H)
D 
(H&FW)
J.D (I.H)
 D.D.H (A)
Zonal Railways
PCMD
Headquarters
CHD
 ACHD
 ACMD
Dy. C.M.D (H & 
F.W.)
Dy. C.M.D 
(T&A)
Dy C.M.D (MS)
Field (Hosp. & H.U)
MD/CMS/MS/Sr. 
DMO/DMO/AD
MO
Railway Audit Manual  
 
151 
For internal use of IA&AD  3.3 At Division / Field level  
I) To provide medical  rescue  and relief  during railway  accidents  and for 
untoward incidences  
II) To conduct pre -employment medical  examination and periodical  medical 
examination of serving employees   
III) To provide emergency  medical  treatment to travelling  passengers  who 
have fallen sick  
IV) To control  man days loss  on account  of sickness.  
V) To provide total comprehensive health  care to serving Railway  
employees , retired  employees  who join RELHS  Scheme  and their 
dependents.  
VI) Referral of patients to recognised hospitals/laboratories , payment of bills  
of such centr es and reimbursement   of claims of staff  
VII) Occupational Health   
VIII) To have regular check on quality  of drinking water .  
IX) To have regular check on quality  of food stu ff sold in railway  stations .  
X) Implementation of various statutory  conditions like Employee’s 
Compensation  Act, Factory  Act, FSSAI (Food Safety  Standard  Authority  
of India ) etc.  
XI) Implementation of various Preventive  and Promotive health  care delivery 
schemes as announced by Central  Govt . 
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
(Ref: Para 3.9 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines ) 
Level of 
unit Main activity  Allied/ sub activity  
RB Compilation  of Annual  
works  programme  proposals 
for New  Hospitals, Additions 
to existing Hospitals and 
purchase  of Medical  
Equipment  and Plants  1. Sanctioning of work  under 
LAWs and lump  sum 
works  
2. Obtaining sanction of 
Railway  Board  for works  
under FWP  
3. Updation of SOR  
RB & Apex  Sanction  of Proposals and 
Estimates  1. Sanction  by Railway  
Board  
2. Sanctions  by the GM  of 
Zonal  Railways  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
152 
For internal use of IA&AD  Apex  & 
Field units  Preparation  and approval  of 
drawings  for tools  and plants 
and estimates  1. Design  & drawings  for 
tools  and plants  
2. Abstract , detailed, revised 
and completion  estimate  
for sanctioned  works  
Field unit  Maintenance  and renewal  of 
Assets  1. Matrons  Account  for 
assets  and tools  and plants  
2. X-ray, sonography , 
ventilator and other 
machineries  
3. Linen  Account  
Apex  & 
Field units  Purchase  of medicines  and 
consumables  1. Centralised procurement  
of medicines  and 
consumables  at apex level  
2. Local  purchase  of 
medicines  at field level  
3. Estimates, Indents, 
purchase orders and 
Registers in Medical  
stores, General  stores and 
pharmacy  
Apex  & 
Field units  Appointment  of CMPs 
(Contract  Medical  
Practitioners) & HVS 
(Honorary  Visiting  
Specialists ) 1. Approval  at apex level of 
the requirement for 
CMP /HVS  
2. Appointment , deployment  
and payment to CMPs/ 
HVSs at field level  
Apex  & 
Field  units  Recognition of hospitals and 
laboratories   1. Recognition of hospitals 
and laboratories  
2. Referral of patients to 
recognised 
hospitals/laboratories   
3. Payment of bills  of such 
hospitals and laboratories  
4. Reimbursement   of claims 
of staff  
Apex  & 
Field units  IT Applications  1. Indian  Railway  E-
procurement  system  
(IREPS ) 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
153 
For internal use of IA&AD  Field unit  Treatm ent of patients in OPD  
(Outdoor  patients 
department)  1. Register  of outdoor 
patients including retired  
employees  covered  under 
RELHS  
2. Register  of supply  of 
medicines  in OPD  
3. Register of tests 
conducted in laboratories, 
X-ray, ECG, USG etc.  
Field unit  
 Treatment  of patients on 
indoor basis  1. Regi ster of indoor 
patients including retired  
employees  covered  under 
RELHS  
2. Register  of medicines  and 
consumables  in wards  
3. Referral of patient to 
other Zonal  Railway  
Hospitals/ Recognised 
Hospitals  
4. Records  of medical  
facilities rendered to 
outsiders and recovery of 
charges  thereof  
5. Records  of Blood Banks   
Field unit  Diet Charges  1. Account  of kitchen in 
hospital  
2. Diet charges  recovery 
statement  
Field unit  Pre-employment medical  
examination and periodical  
medical examination of 
serving employees  1. Records  of Pre -
employment medical  
examination  
2. Records  of periodical  
medical  examination of 
serving employees  2. Hospital  Management  
Information  System  
(HMIS ) 
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
154 
For internal use of IA&AD  Field unit  Medical  Certification  (Issue  
of Sick  and Fit Certificate  to 
Railway  Staff ) 1. Records  of employees  
kept in Sick  list 
2. Issue  of Fit certificate  to 
employees  
3. Records  of medical  de-
categorised staff  
4. Issue of Special pass on 
medical grounds22 
Field unit  Emergency  medical  
treatment of travelling  
passengers   1. Records of calls received 
from traffic  department 
for medical  attention and 
response thereof  
2. Account  of charges  
received from ill 
passengers   
Apex  & 
Field units  Monitoring  of health  and 
family  welfare  programmes  1. Pulse  Polio programmes  
2. Other vaccination  
programmes  
3. Family  planning  
programmes  
Field unit  Monitoring  of sanitation  and 
hygiene  activities  1. Sanitation  and cleanliness  
in hospital , stations  and 
colonies  
2. Regular  check on quality  
of drinking water  
3. Regular  check on quality  
of food stuff sold in 
Railway  Station s 
4. Environmental  sanitation  
and medical  aid to 
passengers  during Fairs & 
Festivals  
Field unit  Monitoring  of Accident  
Relief  operations   1. Provision  and 
maintenance  of Accident  
Relief  Medical  Vans 
(ARMV ) and Accident 
Relief Medical 
Equipme nt (ARME ) 
                                                           
22 Schedule VII of Railway servant pass rules  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
155 
For internal use of IA&AD  2. Timely response at the 
time of accident   
3. Records  of medical  de-
categorised staff  
Apex  & 
Field units  Holding of Seminars and 
Conferences  for CME  
(Continuous  Medical  
Education ) 1. Proposals for holding 
seminars  
2. Records  of conduct of 
seminars  
3. Account  of expenditure  
on such seminars  
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Manpower  planning   1. Creation  of posts  in 
medical , paramedical, 
conservancy and clerical 
category  
2. Placing indents  for 
recruitment  of personnel  
3. Pay and allowances  and 
service  matters  
Apex  & 
Field units  
 Creation  of Assets  1. Construction  of New  
Buildings  for hospitals  
2. Purchase  of tools  and 
plants for hos pitals  
Field units  Disposal  of Hospital  waste  1. Collection , storage and 
disposal  of hospital  
waste . 
2. Segregation  of hazardous 
and non - hazardous waste  
3. Disinfection of liquid 
waste  
Field units  Medical  Audit  1. Conducting medical  audit  
by nominated committee  
of doctors  
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS  
(Ref: Para  3.11 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines ) 
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the Medical  
Department : 
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) Number of Purchase  Orders /Tender  Cases.  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
156 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) When last audited  viz. audited  during  last one year/three year/five 
year/more than five ye ar/never audited . 
IV) Result  of last Audits.  
V) Audit  perception based on Arrears viz. progress of works  with reference 
to expenditure . 
VI) Audit  perception based on News pape r publication, Complaints  lodged 
etc.  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  embarked on a speed  work  of switching ov er to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and have implemented various IT Applications  in the 
last few years .  Presently, following IT applications  are in use in the Medical  
Department . 
6.1 Indian  Railways  E-Procurement  System  (IREPS ) 
This is official portal  of Indian  Railways  for procurement  of Goods , e-tendering  
of Works  & Services , Sale  of Materials , and Leasing  of Assets  through the 
process of E -Tendering , E-auction  or Reverse  Auction . 
The site is compliant to IT  Act 2000 and follows the instructions / guidelines  
issued by Ministry  of Railways  from time  to time  for procurement , sale and 
leasing . The site provides a secure platform to users for online  transactions for 
procurement  and sale. The site caters to requirements of all Zonal  Railways and 
Production  Units  of Indian  Railways , and is also being used by PSUs  like Konkan  
Railway  Corporation  Limited  (KRCL ), and Delhi  Metro  Rail Corporation 
(DMRC) etc.  
For Audit  purpose, we can get the details of tenders  floated by Medical  
department for purchase  of plants/ equipment  as also for purchase  of 
medicines /consumables . 
6.2 Hospital  Management  Information  System  (HMIS ) 
In order to keep records of medical  history of patients with a vie w to reducing 
waiting time  for patient care at the hospital , Railway  Board , vide their letter no. 
2013 /H/8/HMIS  dated 29.07.2016 , advised CMD/Northern  Railway on the scope  
of work  for implementation  of HMIS in Indian  Railway. This included 
Registration  in OPD , OPD Module , Laboratory /Radiology  Investigation  Module, 
Pharmacy Module, IPD Module, Medical  Sickness Module, Local  Purch ase of 
Medicines , Medical Store Inventory  Management , Nurses Roster  Bookings, 
Preparation  of OPD Schedule , Doctors  Ward Assignment etc. It is, however, 
observed from the Railway Board ’s letter  no. 2018/ Trans.Cell/Health /Medical 
card dated 04.01.2019  that HMIS is now being developed by CRIS  (Centre  for 
Railway Information  System ). 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
157 
For internal use of IA&AD  For Audit  purpose, we can review the status of development  and 
operationalisation of various modules  of HMIS , as envisaged by the Railway  
Board . 
7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS -CHECK LIST  
(Ref: Para  3.11 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines ) 
7.1 Works /M&P  Programme  for Medical  Department  
Works /M&P  programmes are financial  investment  proposals relating to creation, 
acquisition  and replacement  of assets  for setting up of a new  hospital  or additions 
to the existing hospitals (for enhancements of beds or for additional  medical  
equipment ) on the basis of which Railway  Board  would appropriate  funds under 
various heads of accounts . Works/Machinery  & Plant  approved  by the Railway 
Board  are included under Approved Annual  Works Programme  and Works 
approved by the GM  of Zonal  Railways  included under L AW ( Chapter III  & IV 
of Indian  Railw ay Medical  Manual , Chapter X of Indian Railway Rolling  Stock  
Code  and Chapter VI of Indian Railway Engineering  Code ). 
During Audit  of Works /M&P  Programme , following should be seen:  
I) That the works /M&P  are proposed with due planning , 
II) That the work /M&P  are proposed after carrying out feasibility  survey  and  
III) That the work /M&P  are proposed with full justification . 
7.2 Sanctions  
Works  sanctions - Sanctions  to be dealt with in the Medical  Branch  will generally 
relate to estimates  or completion  reports  and for the incurrence of other special  
items of expenditure  which are covered  by ordinary rules  and have, therefore, to 
be sanctioned  by competent  authority . The arrangements in force for the receipt  
and audit  of sanctions  accorded by the General  Manager  should be specially 
reviewed, with a view to ensure that such sanctions come under audit scrutiny 
without any omission.  
Following checks  may be exercise d during Audit  of works  sanctions : 
I) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations are endorsed 
by the Finance  Department , wher ever necessary.  
II) Sanctions  are issued under the signature  of the officers concerned in ink  
and not over cyclostyled  signatures . 
III) Sanctions  are financiall y justified duly satisfying the Standards  (canons) 
of financial  propriety  (Para 116 of  F -I). 
IV) The sanctioning authority  is competent  to do so as per the Schedule  of 
Powers.  
V) The currency  of sanction to an estimate  is ordinarily for five years fr om 
the date of according sanction. Currency needs to be renewed by 
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
158 
For internal use of IA&AD  preparing revised estimate and approved  by competent  authority . (Para 
756E ). 
Other sanctions : Other sanctions  include reimbursement  of referral 
treatment/investigation charges , cost  of treatment in government/recognised 
hospital , advance payment to be made to such hospitals, in payment of taxes  to 
municipalities or local  bodies etc., write off  of losses, etc. Ordinari ly sanctions 
accorded by a competent  authority  remain valid for the specified period for which 
they are accorded. It is, however, essential to review such sanctions periodically 
to see that the conditions attaching there to are duly fulfilled before expenditure  
incurred there under is finally admitted  in audit .  
Following checks  may be exercised during Audit  of other sanctions : 
I) Sanction  for reimbursement  of referral treatment/investigation charges , 
cost of treatment in government/recognised hospital , advance payment to 
be made to such hospitals  are to be checked with reference to admissibility 
of the expenditure , preauthorisation by the Authorised Medical  Officers 
to a specific hospital /laboratory  recognised for the particul ars disease, 
production  of bills  duly countersigned by head  of such 
hospital /laboratory . 
II) Sanctions  to the write off  of losses should be co mpletely investigated and 
traced into the Register  of losses or the Register of Serious Irregularities 
maintained by the Accounts  Office  so that all matters requiring further 
departmental  consideration are promptly brought to notice.  
7.3 Review of Tenders  for Sanitation  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with para 2  of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’. 
7.4 Pay Order and Other Vouchers  Not Falling Under  Any Definite Category  
(Misc . Vouchers)  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with para 11  of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’  
7.5 Audit  of Purchase  of Medical  Plants  and Equipment  
Machinery  and Plants  are purchased by h ospitals after sanction in M&P  
Programme  or under LAW Book. Para 404 of IRMM  prescr ibes the procedure 
for such procurement .  
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) A detailed justification  exists for such procurement  or replacement . 
II) A pres cribed  yardstick exists for such additions/replacements and the 
same has been followed while proposing for procurement . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
159 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Clear specification of the equipment , list of likely supplier or Proprietary  
Article  Certificate  (PAC ) is attached with such proposals.  
IV) The cost  of such procurement  has been properly allocated.  
V) A proper entry in Tools  and Plants  Register  has been made for each 
procurement . 
VI) The downtime of the medical  equipment  should be mentioned in a history 
card. It should be reviewed whether such down time has been kept at 
minimum and expenditure  incurred on referral cases for 
investigation/treatment due to such downtime should be suitably 
commented upon.  
7.6 Audit  of Purchase  and Issue  of Med icines  & Consumables  
Purchase  on medicines  in Railway  Hospitals is done on the pattern prescribed  in 
Indian  Railway Pharmacopoeia . The requirement of medicines  is assessed based 
on consumption  pattern in past periods and adeq uacy of stock  for smooth supply  
to patients. Railway Board  has issued detail guidelines  in Drug Procurement  
Policy  2014  for procurement  of medicine, medical  consumables  and local  
purchase . The accountal of receipt  and issue  of such stores  is to be done as 
prescribed  in Chapter IV of IRMM .  
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) A detailed assessment  has been made for each item of purchase . 
II) Purchase  from public  sector undertakings has been given preference.  
III) Transparency has been observed in the tender  process.  
IV) Reasons for non -inclusion of items in Centralised system  of procurement  
and subsequent purchase  from Imprest  or on Emergency  basis may be 
analysed. Cases of extra expenditure  due to higher rate  should be suitably 
commented upon.  
V) All stores  received are accounted for in the Day Book a nd also in the 
Stock  Register  as prescribed  in Para 407 & 408 of IRMM . All issues are 
also entered in the Stock Register and balances are being checked 
periodically by the ADMO/ DMO  in charge of stores .  
VI) Every care is being taken for utilization of medicines  within their date of 
expiry and action  for disposal  of surplus  items approaching expiry is 
promptly taken as prescribed  in Para 412 of IRMM .  
VII) Whether any system  in place to segregate the expired medicines  and 
whether they are separately exhibited in the  stock  registers  (including 
online  inventory ) of the various medical  units . 
VIII) What actions are taken to transfer the medicines  which are likely t o expire 
to another health  unit/division?  
IX) Whether any expired medicines  have been issued to patients.  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
160 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) Whether any system  in place to check the quality  of medicine supplied by 
the firms. If not, how the quality  of medicines  supplied by vendors  are 
ensured.  
XI) Whether any medicines  have been found sub -standards  in Government  
lab. 
XII) Whe ther these substandard medicine has ever been distributed to patient 
before arrival of sub -standard quality  report form Govt . lab.  
XIII) What any actions are taken against the firms for of supply  sub-standard 
medicine s. 
XIV)  Whether the sub -standard medicines were replaced by the firms in time 
or cost there of is recovered?.  
7.7 Manpower  Planning  
 Manpower  in Medical  Department  of Railways  is directly related with level of 
patient care, hence proper assessment  and deployment  of doctors, nurses and 
other paramedical staff  are of utmost importance. The sanction  strength  of various 
categories of staff  and doctors has to be judiciously decided and their availability 
has to be ensured with a proper attention to their rational deployment . 
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Effect on medical  attendance  to patients due to vacancies  in various 
categories should be reviewed for possible comments . 
II) Idling or improper handling of medical  equipment  due to non -availability 
of trained staff  should be commented upon.  
III) Un-justified deployment  of doctors and paramedical staff  in 
administrative duties should b e reviewed for possible comments . 
IV) Non-implementation  of recommendations , if any, of the Work  Study 
Teams on Medical  Department  shoul d be reviewed for possible 
comments . 
7.8 Appointment  of Contract  Medical  Practitioners (CMP )/ Honorary  Visiting  
Specialists  (HVS)  
In the case of vacancies  in the doctor’s cadre  in Railway  Hospitals/Dispensaries , 
engagement  of Contract  Medical  Practitioners (CMP ) is done with the approval  
of Medical Director  (MD) for Zonal  Hospital  and DRM /CWM  for 
Divisional /Workshop  Hospitals & Dispensaries. They are paid monthly  
remuneration  at the rates fixed  from time  to time . Similarly, Honorary  Visiting  
Specialists  are engaged in Railway Hospitals on 4/2 hours per day for 2 to 6 
days/week basis in order to overcome the shortage o f Specialist  Railway Doctors . 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
161 
For internal use of IA&AD  During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Adherence to various Circulars /Orders issued by Railway  Board  for 
engage ment  of CMPs/HVSs may be reviewed for possible comments  on 
deviations, if any.  
II) Deployment  of CMPs/HVSs along with number of cases attended by such 
CMPs/HVSs with reference to the justification  for their engagement  may 
be reviewed for possible comments . 
III) Remuneration  paid to such CMPs/HVSs may be reviewed with reference 
to the rates prevalent at that time  and also for deductions made for the 
days of absence.  
7.9 Recognition of Hospitals and Laboratories  
For the treatment of such ailments/investigations, which are not available in  the 
Railway  Hospitals, Railway Administration  is recognising Private  Hospitals and 
Laboratories  for referral of patients on case to case basis. Such recognition is 
done by the MDs for Zonal  Hospitals and DRM /CWM  for Divisional /Workshop  
Hospitals & Dispensaries  with associated finance concurrence. CGHS  
empanelled  hospitals and diagnostic centres may also be recognised by enteri ng 
into MoU  and they may be paid the treatment/investigation charges  at CGHS 
rates.    
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Adherence to various Circulars /Orders issued by Railway  Board  for 
empanelment  of Private  hospitals/laboratories  may be reviewed for 
possible comments  on deviations, if any.  
II) Referral of patients for investig ation/treatment due to downtime of 
medical  equipment  in Railway  hospitals may be reviewed for suitable 
comments . 
7.10 Treatment  in Outdoor  Patients Department  (OPD )/Indoor     Patients 
Department (IPD)  
The particulars, like Name, Age, Designation, Department , Pay , Medical  Identity 
Card  No. etc. of  serving/reti red Railway  employees  visiting Railway 
Hospitals/Dispensaries , are entered in a register  both for Outdoor  & Indoor  
treatment. Medicines  issued to such patients are accounted for in a separate 
register . The patients requiring specialised treatment, facilities for which are not 
available in the Railway Hospital , are referred to recognised ho spitals.   
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) The register  of patients is maintained properly and medical  identity card 
number is mentioned in each case.  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
162 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) The medicines  issued to pa tients should be totalled daily and it should be 
reflected in the receipt  and issue  register  of medicines . 
III) The records of medical  facilities rendered to outsiders should be ch ecked 
to see its authorisation by a competent  Medical  Officer and also for 
recovery of correct charges , as notified from time  to time . 
IV) Records  of Blood Banks , attached to Railway  Hospitals, should be seen 
to verify the proper accountal of collection and issue  of blood to 
beneficiaries.  
7.11 Matrons  Account  Including Linen  Account  
In terms of Para 203 of IRMM , Chief  Matron/Matron of a Railway  Hospital  is 
in-charge for supervision of the work  of the hospital  staff. She is also responsible 
for proper cleanliness  and maintenance  of the hospital  as also f or the matters 
related to hospital  linen , patient’s clothing, beds, furniture , diet arrangement for 
the patients etc. She will be in -charge of Tools  & Plants , Dead  Stock Register  and 
Consumable  Stores  Register of the hospital .  
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) The register  of T&P, Linen , Beds & Furniture  etc. are maintained properly 
and any shortcomings are attended to on priority.  
II) Regular  attention is given on attendance  & discipline of staff  and all the 
staff are employed on their legitimate duties.  
III) Out of order tools  & equipment  are repaired promptly. Cases of referral 
of patients to private  hospitals and laboratories  due to downti me of 
equipment  should be reviewed and comments  made.  
IV) Timely proposal for condemnation & replacement  of unserviceable  stores  
and outlived equipment  is prepared and submitted for prompt 
procurement . 
V) Periodical stock verification is conducted by Assistant Stock verifier/ 
Inspector of Stores Accounts  and stock sheets are cleared as expeditiously 
as possible  
7.12 Diet Charges  
In terms of Para 639 to 642 of IRMM , Railway  Hospitals should p rovide cooked 
food to in -patients, the charges  for which are to be fixed  by each Zonal  Railway 
on ‘No Profit - No Loss basis ’. The rates so fixed are to be reviewed every three 
years for revision . The bills  for diet charges  are to be submitted to pay  sheet 
preparing unit  (PPU) of the concerned employee for recovery.    
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) A proper accountal of inputs  and diet prepared is kept in the kitchen.  
II) Regular  revision  of diet rates is done.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
163 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Diet charges  recovery statement has been prepared properly with no 
omissions and it has been sent to concern PPU for recovery.  
7.13 Pre-Employment  And Periodical  Medical  Examination  
Chapter 5 of IRMM  prescribes that no person will be deemed qualified for 
admission to the public  service , who shall not satisfy the appointing authority , 
that he has no disease or bodily infirmity unfitting him or likely to unfit him for 
that service . Candidates entering Railway  service  are checked medically  in 
Railway Hospitals on the stan dards  fixed  for the particular category of 
employment. Similarly, certain categories of Railway employees , in order to 
discharge their duties with safety , are required to appear for re -examin ation at the 
prescribed  intervals  throughout their service .    
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Each case of Medical  examination is done on an authorisation le tter issued 
by the appointing authority  or by the departmental  superior (Ref - Para 515 
of IRMM ). 
II) A proper record of all such examinations is kept in the hospital  and 
fit/unfit certificates are issued promptly.  
III) Procedure of collection of blood samples for the presence of alcohol to 
detect drunkenness on duty is foll owed.23 
7.14 Medical  Certification  (Issue  of Sick  and Fit Certificates)  
Chapter 5 (Section  D) of IRMM  prescribes different types of certificates that are 
issued by the Railway  doctors in the event of sickness of a Railway employee. 
Railway employees , unable to attend duty  by reason of sickness, must produce 
sick certificate  from the competent  Railway doctor within 48 hours. When issuing 
a sick certificate , the Railway doctor will exercise care and judgement in 
recomme nding the period of absence for which the employee  is unable to attend 
duty to ensure that the certificate issued is as per/reflect the nature and severity 
of the illness’. . A Railway employee, who is placed on sick list by a Railway 
doctor, will continue to report to him at such intervals  as directed by the doctor 
and if he fails to do so, he is liable to be discharged from sick list for non -
attendance . A sick employee, if found fit for duty on subsequent medical  
examination, will be issued a fit or duty certificate  by the competent Railway 
doctor. If in the opinion  of the attending doctor, there is no reasonable prospect 
that the employee will be fit to resume the duti es of his post ; the case may be 
referred to a Medical  Board  headed by CMS /MS of the division, who will forward 
its recommendation for invalidation of the employee to the CMD, the competent 
authority . 
                                                           
23 Board 's letter No. 99/H/7/C.Rly dated :15 .12.2003  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
164 
For internal use of IA&AD  During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Each case of sick certificate  is issued by the authority  for a period not 
exceeding the authorised period as prescribed  in Para 544 of IRMM . 
II) Medical  identity card number of the employee is invariably mentioned on 
sick/fit  certificates.  
III) Each case of failing to report to the attending doctor has been taken care 
of while issuing the absence or fit certificate . 
IV) Prompt action  has been taken to refer any case to the Medical  Boar d and 
its recommendations  are made without undue  delay, so as to avoid 
prolonged continuation of an employee in the sick list.  
7.15 Emergency  Medical  Treatment  of Travelling  Passengers  
In terms of Para 628 of IRMM , while it is not incumbent on the Railways  to 
provide medical  relief  to passengers  who fall ill, such assistance is invariably 
rendered in practice  as a matter of courtesy to a customer . Whenever a Railway  
doctor attends to such ill passenger , issued charge the consultation fee and the 
cost of medicines  and injections etc. as fixed  from time  to time .   
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) A proper system  of recording such calls from trains /stations  for aid to 
passengers  is available i n the Railway  hospital  and quick response is 
given in all such cases.  
II) Necessary charges , as prescribed , have been recovered in all the cases of 
such medical  attendance  to travelling  passengers  and remitted to Railway 
earnings.  
7.16 Monitoring  of Accident  Relief  Operations  
Chapter 7 of IRMM  prescribes that in the case of Railway  accidents , Railway 
administration has to provide rapid evacuation, n ecessary first aid treatment and 
shifting the injured persons to the nearest hospitals by the first available means 
of transport . With a view to provide prompt medical  aid, the Railways  have 
established  system  of network  including provision of first aid boxes with guards  
in trains , Accident  Relief  Medical  Vans (ARMV )- Scale  I, Accident Relief 
Medical Equipment  (ARME )- Scale II and Portable Medical Kit of Accidents 
(POMKA). The Medical officer in -charge of the section  is responsible for 
insuring (by periodical  and annual  inspection ) that the contents of the accident  
relief  medical equipment  Scale I & Scale II are as prescribed  and are in goo d 
order. An annual  certificate  in this regard has to be submitted by the Medical 
Officer in -charge to the CMS /PCMD .  The in -charge doctor will keep a detailed 
record of time  of receip t of information of accident , time  of occurrence of the 
accident , time  of his departure for the site of accident , details of the staff  who 
accompanie d, medical equipment  taken or ordered to be despatched to the site of 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
165 
For internal use of IA&AD  accident , time  of his arrival at the site of accident , the name and addresses of all 
persons injured with details of inju ries and the details showing how each case has 
been disposed of. 
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) A proper system  of recording such calls of accident  from 
trains /stations /Control  rooms is available in the Railway  hospital  and 
quick response is given for calling the in -charge doctor and other staffs.  
II) Prompt attention for reaching the accident  site has b een given and any 
undue  delay may be commented upon.  
III) Shortfalls in inspections  of ARME  Scale  I & II including First Aid Boxes 
may be commented upon24. 
IV) Inspection  notes  should be studied by Audit  for shortcomings noticed by 
the authority  and action  taken on them.  
7.17 Monitoring  of Health  and Family  Welfare  Prog rammes  
The Railways  are actively involved in the implementation  of various National  
Health  Programmes like Family  Welfare , Malaria eradication, Tuberculo sis 
control , Cancer  control , Mental Health, Diabetes  control ; STD /AIDS  control  
Programmes etc. The Railways take measures  for implementation  of these 
programmes in line  with the guidelines  issued by Central / State  Government / 
Agencies  and as enumerated in Chapter 9 (Section  G) of IRMM . Similarly, 
various Immunisation Programmes are also carried out by Railway  Medical  
Department  in Railway premises (including residential  areas, stations  and trains ) 
in liaison  with the Programme  monitoring  agencies of Central/ State Government.  
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) The records of various health  programmes showing the coverage, input 
from the monitoring  agencies/ Government  are maintained and reports  
generated. Reports generated in respect of various health programmes 
should be seen to highlight shortcomings, if any.  
II) The Feedback mechanism  for implementation  of these programmes 
should be reviewed and suitably commented upon.  
III) The accounts of the Railway TB Associa tions (IRTBA) at the Divisional , 
HQ or Railway Board  level are audited without fail within 4 months of 
the end of each financial year. The interest accured from the corpus of the 
Association and up to 50% of the income from the sale of TB seats of the 
year is utilised for the activities, as mentioned in the guidelines; the corpus 
and the remaining 50% of the income for the year is kept in suitable 
deposits.(Para 954 of IRMM) . 
                                                           
24 Para 706(15) of IRMM  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
166 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Expenditure on sterilisation and IUD is suitably reflected in accounts and 
reimbursement from Ministry of Health & Family welfare is properly 
watched.  
7.18 Monitoring  of Sanitation  and Hygiene Activities  
Chapter 9 of IRMM  prescribes various  sanitation  and cleanliness  activities 
including monitoring  of safe  water  supply  to be undertaken by Railways  Medical  
Depar tment ; whereas Chapter 10 of IRMM  prescribes the measures  for 
prevention of food adulteration. Medical  and Health  Department of Railways is 
responsible for monitoring  the sanitation and cleanliness  in hospitals, stations  and 
colonies . A proper system  of W aste Management  in collaboration  with local  
municipal  agencies is to be in place. Regular  check of quality  of drinking water 
in railway  premises is to be ensured. Similarly, the regular check o n quality  on 
food stuff sold at Railway  stations is also the responsibility of the Medical 
Department. The department is also responsible for ensuring e nvironmental 
sanitation and provision of medical  aid to passengers  during Fairs (Mela) and 
Festivals . 
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) Proper  System  of monitoring  the sanitation  activities including disposal  
of waste  and garbage is in place and prompt follow up  action  is taken in 
case of deviations .  
II) Samples of water  and food stuff are taken on regular basis and proper 
action  is taken without any delay in the case of detection  of poor quality / 
adulteration.  
III) Arrangements made during fairs  and festivals should be reviewed for any 
possible comments . 
IV) Proper  system  for collection, segregation  (into hazardous and non -
hazardous), storage and disposal  of hospital  waste  exists and is monitored 
regularly.  
V) Pre-treatment was carried out to the laboratory waste, microbiological 
waste, blood samples, blood bags and all other clinical laboratory waste 
through disinfection or sterilisation on -site as per prescribed manner 
before packing and sending to the common bio -medical waste treatment 
facility25. 
VI) Bio-Medical  Waste Management Rules, 2016 under the 
Environment(Protection) Act , 1986 are implemented to improve the 
collection, segregation, processing, treatment and disposal of bio -medical 
                                                           
25 Bio-Medical  Waste Management Rules, 2016  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
167 
For internal use of IA&AD  wastes reducing the bio -medical waste generation and its impact on the 
environment26. 
7.19 Holding of Seminars and Conferences  for Continuous  Medical  Education  
Chapter 2 of IRMM  prescribes for periodical  professional training  to Railway  
Medical  Officers and Non -gazetted  Medical Personnel  as per their requirement 
of work  and to upgrade their knowledge  and skill o n regular basis in order to keep 
pace with the Technology / Scientific developments. Each Zonal  Railway will 
prepare an annual  prospective plan for training  as per the module  developed or as 
directed by the Railway Board .    
During the Audit , it should be seen whether - 
I) The records of various training  programmes showing the coverage, the 
expenditure  involved  are maintained  and reports  generated . Reports 
generated in respect of various training  programme  should be seen to 
highlight shortcomings, if any.  
7.20 Conducting Medical  Audit  (by nominated Committee  of Doctors ) 
Medical  Audit  aims at improving the deficiencies  in treatment and providing 
better health  care facilities. In each hospita l, a Committee  of five doctors 
nominated from different departments  of the hospital  conducts audit  of medical  
facilities.   
During the Audit , it should be seen whether: - 
I) The Committee  for conducting Medical  Audit  of Zonal , Divisional  and 
Sub-divisional  Hospitals has been nominated and is conduct ing Audit in 
a regular way.  
II) Remedial action  on shortcomings noticed during such Medical  Audit  is 
taken promptly.  
List of items to be seen during inspection  
Zonal /Divisional /Sub -Divisional Hospitals & Dispensaries   
I) Matrons  Account  
II) Outdoor  patients register   
III) Indoor  patients register  
IV) Records  of pre -employment and periodical  medical  examination  
V) Records  of Sick  and Fit Certificate  issued to employees  along with 
records of d e-categorised or invalidated employees   
VI) Register  of medicines , instruments etc.  
VII) Equipment  kept idle due to vacancy of skilled staff  or under repair  
VIII) Diet charges  recovery statement  
                                                           
26 Bio-Medical  Waste Management Rules, 2016  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
168 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) Breakage  and loss  statement  
X) Distribution  of conservancy staff  
XI) Local  Purchase  of medicines  
XII) Medicines  from  staff benefit fund.  
XIII) Annual estimates, indents purchase orders and supply of medicines  
XIV)  Linen  Accounts . 
XV) Account  of fees collected for services to passengers  and other persons 
injured in accidents  
XVI)  Recovery  of charges  for medical  facilities rendered to outsiders  
XVII)  Records  of sampling and follow up  action  for quality  of drinking 
water  and food stuff  
XVIII)  Financial  Expenses.  
XIX)  Review of quarterly statement of expenditure  on family  planning  
scheme.  
XX) Check  of fees paid by Retired Railway  employees  for availing of 
medical  facility from Railway hospital . 
XXI)  Recovery  adjustment of charges  for medical  facilities r endered to staff  
of railway  / outsiders, incumbents of other Govt . Departments  
including period of revision . 
XXII)  Accident  Relief  Medical  Van- Periodical  inspection , accountal of 
medicines  and equipment  etc. 
XXIII)  Records  related to relief  operations  conducted during acci dents  
XXIV)  Recognition of Private  Hospitals/Laboratories  
XXV)  Referral of patients to Private  Hospitals/Laboratories  and payments 
made thereof  
XXVI)  Library  medical  books , journals , accountal thereof  
XXVII)  Pulse  polio and other immunization programmes - accountal of 
medicine  
XXVIII)  Appointment  of CMPs/HVSs and payments to them  
XXIX)  Check  of tools and plants provided for the Melas and steps taken for 
environmental sanitation    
XXX)  Recovery  of ambulance  charges . 
XXXI)  Review of registration  of firms su pplying medicine & other medical  
stores . 
XXXII)  Review of inspection  of manufacturing firms conducted by nominated 
committee . 
XXXIII)  Review of tenders  and contracts  
XXXIV)  Salary bills 
XXXV)  Records  of DNB doctors  
XXXVI)  Check  of recovery of rent  and rent rolls  
XXXVII)  Review of M&P  
XXXVIII)  Annual  budget  of medicine  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
169 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXIX)  Leave  records  
XL) Passes  & PTOs including accounts  
XLI) Misc . cash collection  
XLII)  Sanctioned  strength  
XLIII)  All stores  ledgers   
XLIV)  Test check of medicines  issued to the patients with the slips prescribed  
by the Doctors  
XLV)  Check  of cases of medical  re-imbursement  
XLVI)  Special passes issued on medical grounds27 
 
  
                                                           
27Schedule VII of Railway servant pass rules  
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
170 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of Abbreviations  
   
1 ACHD  Additional  Chief  Health  Director  
2 ADMO  Assistant  Divisional  Medical  Officer  
3 AIDS  Acquired Immu ne Deficiency Syndrome  
4 ARME  Accident  Relief  Medical  Equipment  
5 ARMV  Accident  Relief  Medical  Vans  
6 CGHS  Central  Government  Health  Scheme  
7 CHD  Chief  Health  Director  
8 CME  Continuous  Medical  Education  
9 CMP  Contract  Medical  Practitioner  
10 CMS  Chief  Medical  Superintendent  
11 CRB /CEO  Chairman /Chief  Executive  Officer, Railway  Board  
12 CRIS  Centre  for Railway  Information  Systems  
13 CWM  Chief  Workshop  Manager  
14 DG (RHS)  Director  General  (Railway  Health  Services ) 
15 DMO  Divisional  Medic al Officer  
16 DMRC  Delhi  Metro  Rail Corporation  
17 DRM  Divisional  Railway  Manager  
18 Dy.CMD  Deputy  Chief  Medical  Director  
19 E Indian  Railway  Code  for Engineering  Department  
20 ED Executive  Director  
21 F-I Indian  Railway  Code  for Finance  Department , Vol. I  
22 FSSAI  Food Safety  Standard  Authority  of India 
23 FWP  Final Works  Programme  
24 GM General  Manager  
25 HERO  Healthcare for the Entire Railway  Organisation  
26 HMIS  Hospital  Management  Information  System  
27 HVS  Honorary  Visiting  Specialist  
28 IPD Inpatient s Department  
29 IR Indian  Railway  
30 IREPS  Indian  Railway  E-procurement  System  
31 IRMM  Indian  Railway  Medical  Manual  
32 IT Information  Technology  
33 JD Joint  Director  
34 KRCL  Konkan  Railway  Corporation  Limited  
35 LAW  List of Approved  Works  
36 M & P  Machinery  and Plants  
37 MoU  Memorandum  of Understanding  
38 OPD  Out Patients Department  
39 PAC  Proprietary  Article  Certificate  
40 PCMD  Principa l Chief  Medical  Director  
41 PED  Principal  Executive  Director  
42 POMKA  Portable Medical  Kit of Accidents  
43 PPU Paysheet preparing Unit  
44 PSU Public  Sector  Undertaking  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
171 
For internal use of IA&AD  45 RB Railway  Board  
46 RELHS  Retired Employees  Liberalis ed Health  Scheme  
47 SOR  Schedule  of Rates  
48 Sr. DMO  Senior  Divisional  Medical  Officer  
49 STD  Sexually Tra nsmitted Disease  
50 T & P  Tools  and Plants  
51 WCA  Workmen ’s Compensation  Act 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  – Audit of Medical Department  
 
172 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
173 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 6  - AUDIT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
The Civil  Engineering  Department  in Railways  consists of two wings viz 
Construction  and Open  line Organisations . 
The Construction  Organisation  of the Civil  Engineering  Department  is 
responsible for the creation of the assets  by way of construction  of buildings , new  
lines  and doubling work , gauge  conversion , construction  of Major /minor bridges , 
Limited  use subways (LUS) etc,. The Organisation is headed by Chief  
Administrative  Officer  (CAO ) reporting directly to the Railway  Board /GM .  
The Open  Line Organisation  of the Civil  Engineering  Department  is headed by 
the Principal  Chief  Engineer  at the Zonal  Railways  reporting directly to the 
General  Manager  of the Zone and is responsible for the maintenance  and renewal  
of civil engineering  assets  of the Railways. However, in addition to maintenance  
of assets  created by Construction  Organisation, the works  costing  less than Rs.10 
Crore are generally  executed by the Open Line  Organisation (RB ’s directives of 
December, 2018)  
2. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 
DEPARTMENT  
The civil engineering  department at Railway  Board  level is headed by the 
Member  (engineering) and assisted by a dditional  members (engineering), 
executive  directors and directors.  
 
 

Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
174 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.1 Open  Line  
At Zonal  Railway  Level the Open  line wing is headed by Principal  Chief  Engineer  
duly assisted by various Chief Engineers  (CE) viz. CE/MRTS , CTE , CBE , CPDE , 
CGE  and the Dy.  Chief Engineers  of the relevant fields.  
At Divisional  level, there are Senior  Divisional Engineers  of various territorial 
jurisdictions duly assisted by Div isional Engineers  under the administrative 
control  of DRM  of the Division . 
The Assistant  Engineers  are in -charge of duties at sub divisional  level duly 
assisted by SSEs  (Works and P. Way) in -charge of the sections at field level.  
2.2 Construction  Organisation  
The Construction  Organisation  is headed by Chief  Administrative  Officer  (CAO ) 
assisted by Chief Engineers , Deputy  Chief Engineers  at Zonal  Headquarters  level. 
At field level deputy Chief engineers look after the execution  of the projects  duly 
assisted by the Executive  and Assistant  Engineers  (XENs  and AENs ) and Senior  
Section  Engineers  (SSEs ). 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1  At Railway  Board  level  
I) Framing / interpretation of rules   
II) Approval  of Projects  
III) Sanctioning of estimates   
IV) Funds  provisions  
V) Monitoring  of progress of projects  
3.2  At Zonal  Level  
I) To ensure efficient maintenance  and renewal  of all open line  works , 
permanent  way, b ridges  and other structures . 
II) Preparation  and compilation  of budgetary  requirements.  
III) Coordination  and compilation  of Annual  Works  programme  and getting 
approval  for the same.  
IV) Approval  and sanction of plans , designs  and estimates  prepared by the 
Divis ions/Field Offices.  
V) Control  over expenditure  of sanctioned  projects  – to incur expenditure  
within the limits of financial  powers  and within budget  allotment.  
VI) Compilation  and maintenance  of Division  wise schedule  of rates.  
VII) Compilation  and maintenance  of st andard design  and drawing  
specification.  
VIII) Monitoring  execution  of work . 
IX) Acquisition , custody, management  and disposal  of land. 
X) Maintenance  of land  records and land  plans . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
175 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Leasing  and licensing  of land  and building . 
XII) Approval  and sanction of private , assisted and public  sidings  and 
development  of private  freight  terminals . 
XIII) To carry out feasibility  studies, traffic  surveys , Reconnaissance  surveys, 
Preliminary surveys and Final Location Surveys.  
3.3  At Division /Field level  
I) Acquisition of Land  
II) Maintenance of recor ds relating to Land  
III) Preparation  of plans  and estimates  
IV) Maintenance  of P. Way  
V) Maintenance  of Bridges  ROB /RUB , Level crossings  etc. 
VI) Maintenance  of railway  land and sidings  
VII) Repair and Maintenance  of Buildings .  
VIII) To ensure economic  use of labour  and materials  
IX) Maintenance /accountal of surplus  and released material  stock  
X) Disposal  of Scrap  material  
XI) To ensure commencement of any work  with proper sanction of competent  
authority  
XII) To ensure strict adherence of sanctioned  design  and drawing  in exe cution  
of works  
XIII) Prompt disbursement  of money for the works  executed  
XIV)  Maintenance  of records for day today physical  as well financial  progress 
of the work  
XV) Physical  maintenance  and custody of the material  procured and received 
for execution  and maintenance  of the engineering  works . Issue  and 
transfer of the material  under the custody of the department as per  
requirement and maintaining of records for the same.  
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
Level of unit  Main activity  Allied/ sub activity  
RB Compilation  of Annual  
works  programme  
proposals  1. Sanctioning of work  under 
LAWs and lump  sum works  
2. Obtaining sanction of railway  
board for works  under FWP  
3. Updation of SOR  
RB & Apex  Sanction  of Projects  and 
Estimates  1. Sanction  by Railway  Board  
2. Sanctions  by the GM  of Zonal  
Railways  or the CAO  of 
Construction  Organisation  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
176 
For internal use of IA&AD  Apex  & 
Field unit s 
 Preparation  and approval  
of drawings  and 
estimates  1. Design  & drawings . 
2. Abstract , detailed, revised and 
completion  estimate  for 
sanctioned  works  
Field unit  Maintenance  and 
renewal  of Assets  1. Track  
2. Station  building s 
3. Service  buildings  
4. Service  roads  
5. Staff  quarters  and other assets  
relating to staff  amenities  
6. Assets  relating to passenger  
amenities  
Field unit  Maintenance  and 
renewal  / rehabilitation  
of bridges  1. Major  and Minor  Bridges   
2. Limited  use subways  
3. Foot over bridges  (FOB)  
Field unit  Execution of various 
works  1. Revenue  works  
2. Special  works  
3. Works  undertaken on deposit  
terms  
4. Works  under MPLAD  
Apex  & 
Field units  IT Applications  1. Track  Maintenance  system  
(TMS ) 
2. Indian  Railway s Project s 
Sanctions and  Management  
IRPSM ) 
3. Indian  Railway  E-procurement  
system    (IREPS ) 
4. Integrated  Payroll  and 
accounting system  (IPAS ) 
5. Bridge  Management  system  
(BMS)  
Apex  & 
Field units  Land  Management  
System  Matter pertaining to:  
1. Acquisition  of Land  
2. Maintenance  of records relating 
to Land  
3. Encroachment of Railway  land 
4. Unauthorised occupation of 
Residential /service  buildings  
5. Commercial  utilisation of Land  
6. Publicity outsid e the Station  
limits  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
177 
For internal use of IA&AD  7. Leasing  of land  
8. Dealing court  cases relating to 
Railway  land 
9. Collection  and accountal of 
revenues from land  
10. Way lea ve facilities for track  
crossing, OFC, CTV, pipeline 
crossings etc.  
11. Allotment  of Land  to Private  
Freight  Terminals  (PFTs)  
Field unit  
 Maintenance  of Sidings  1. Assisted  Sidings  
2. Private  Sidings  
3. Railway  Sidings  
Apex  & 
Field units  Track  Machine  
utilisation  1. Purchase , utilisation and 
maintenance  
2. Raising of debits  against users  
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Obtaining CRS  sanction  1. Initiation for CRS  sanction.  
2. Timely completion  of CRS  
inspection . 
3. Attending to queries of CRS  
4. Obtaining of CRS  certificate . 
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Compilation  of 
Accounts  and Funds  
certification  1. Budget  Estimation  (BG)  
2. Revised  Estimation  (RE) 
3. Final Modification  (FM)  
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Manpower  management  1. Creation  of posts  
2. Placing I ndents  for recruitment  
of personnel.  
3. Maintenance  of service  records 
of erstwhile Group  ‘D’ 
employees . 
4. Pay & allowances  and Service  
matters.  
Apex  & 
Field units  
 Creation  of Assets  1. Construction  of New  Lines  
2. Gauge  conversion  of existing 
NG/MG Lines in to BG  
3. Provisions of additional  track  
lines (Doubling ) 
4. Construction  of ROB / RUB / 
LUS /Minor  bridges /(FOBs) 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
178 
For internal use of IA&AD  for Railway s on Deposit  terms  
5. Staff  amenities  
6. Passenger  amenities  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  3.3 to 3.8 - defining the apex auditable entities 
and audit  units  - A top down , risk  based, Department  centric mechanism  for 
macro level planning  and conducting compliance  audits and preparation of annual  
Compliance Audit Plans)  
5. IMPORTANT RIS K PARAMETERS  
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the Engineering  
Department :  
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) Number of Tender  cases/ Contract  cases/ other misc. cases.  
III) When last Audited  viz. audited  during last one year/three year/five 
year/more than five year/never audited . 
IV) Result  of last Audit . 
V) Audit  perception based on Arrears viz. progress of works  with reference 
to expenditure . 
VI) Audit  perception based on newspaper  publication, Complaints  lodged etc.  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines - 3.9 to 3.11 - Risk Profiling)  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  embarked on a speed  work  of switching over to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and have implemented various IT Applications  in the 
last few years .  Presently, following IT applications  are in use in the Engineering  
Department , from which the detailed information can be extracted for exercising 
Audit  checks , as stated against each items above.  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelin es-4.20 Compliance auditing  in digital  environment - 
In case of departments / sectors where e -governance has taken roots and 
transactions are being conducted in virtualised environments, digital  auditing  can 
also be adopted by the audit  teams) . 
6.1 Indian  Railways  Projects  Sanctions  & Management  (IRPSM ) 
IRPSM  is a Web -based Application  that allo ws online  creation & forwarding of 
‘New  Works ’ proposals along with modifications  to ‘Works in Progress ’ from 
Zonal  Railways  and PUs  to Railway  Board  for printing of Works Programme , 
Pink Book  and other sanction books  after processing & sanctions  of projects  in 
Railway Board , Zonal Railways/PUs, Divisions  etc. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
179 
For internal use of IA&AD  Further, monthly  updation of status of various activities associated in execution  
of sanctioned  works  has been in-built for effective Management & Monitoring  of 
all such Projects . 
Scope:  
I) On-line creation of ‘New  Proposals’ with justification , ‘Abstract  
Estimate ’ and sketch plan by divisions /workshops /railways/PUs /Railway  
Board . 
II) Short listing of proposals by sanctioning authorities  (DRMs & GMs) . 
III) Processing of proposals and capture of comments  from each concerning 
official of Railways  till it is vetted and sanctioned  by competent  authority . 
IV) Generation  & forwarding of PWP  books  for volumes – II, III & IV . 
V) Interface with all concerned directorates in Railway  Board  for short listing 
of proposals . 
VI) Meeting  of Additional  Members ’ committee /Boards’ meeting, 
finalization of proposals and minutes . 
VII) On-line updation of ‘Works  In Progress ’ by coordinating departments  on 
zonal railways and generation/forwarding of volume -I of PWP . 
VIII) On-line data analysis  and assigning of outlays by Railway  Board . 
IX) On-line verification /correction of Hindi data by Rajbhasha . 
X) Tracking  of works  from conceptualization to completion . 
XI) Financial  and physical  progress monitoring  of works  over the year . 
XII) Analysis  of data and generation of various MIS reports . 
XIII) Provision  of “Out Of Turn” works  through  “Supplementary  Demands  For 
Grants ”. 
IRPSM  Features  
For Divisions : 
I) Creation  of “New  Works  Proposals” with justific ation  & abstract cost . 
II) Shortlisting of proposals by DRM  . 
III) Forwarding of proposal for financial  vetting, Sanction  of proposals under 
DRM ’s power  and forwarding of proposals costing  beyond DRM’s power  
to zonal railway  Hqrs.  
IV) Creation  & processing of internal  notings by finance . 
V) Adding all the works  sanctioned  under DRM ’s power  to the list of ‘In -
Progress ’ works  in IRPSM . Each sanctioned  work  has been assigned 
unique  Project -ID as per ID -Protocol, detailed in application . 
VI) Reporting of status every month  for each work  by respective executing 
agency . 
VII) Generating & printing (if desired) of works  programme  reports . 
 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
180 
For internal use of IA&AD  For Zonal  Railways : 
I) Shortlisting of proposals by GM . 
II) Examining & processing the ‘New  Works  Proposals’ as received from 
divisions . Also, creation of the same similar to as provided for divisions  
and then forwarding to Railway  Board . 
III) Creation  & processing of internal  notings by fin ance. 
IV) Adding all the works  sanctioned  under GM ’s power  to the list of ‘In -
Progress ’ works  in IRPSM . Each sanctioned  work  has been assigned 
unique  project -ID as per ID Protocol, detailed in Appendix -V. 
V) Entries in IRPSM  under the sanctioning powers of DRMs/CWMs for 
various plan heads.  
VI) Defining fund availability & sanctioning limits  for zonal railway  Hqrs. & 
divisions . 
VII) Reporting of status every month  for each work  by respective executing 
agency . 
VIII) On-line generating, printing (if desired) & forward ing of works  
programme  documents /books  to Railway  Board  (EDCE/G) . 
For Railway  Board  
I) Forwarding of proposals by EDCE (G) to nodal directorate  for respective 
plan heads.  
II) On-line shortlisting, recommending & forwarding to EDCE (G) new  
works  proposals costing  < Rs.20 crore each by nodal directorates through 
concerned AMs for all plan heads.  
III) Compilation  of all shortlisted proposals (costing  < Rs. 20 crore) by EDCE 
(G) for meeting of AMs’ committee . 
IV) On-line recording of recommendations  given by AMs’ committee  and 
issuing minutes  accordingly to all concerned.  
V) On-line shortlisting & forwarding of new  works  proposals costing  > Rs. 20 
crore each by nodal directorates for finance concurrence.  
VI) On-line recording of recommendations  given during Boards’ meeting and 
issuing minutes  accordingly to all concerned.  
VII) On-line ‘Yell ow Slip’ provision for off -the-record consultation on 
proposals.  
VIII) Such shortlisted &recommended proposals for each plan head  with on -
line consent and remarks of finance will be processed by nodal 
directorates on file  for approval  of Board  & Hon’ble MR . 
IX) Finally approved  proposals will be updated in the web -based software  by 
nodal directorates through EDCE (G) for further processing by  budget  
directorate . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
181 
For internal use of IA&AD  After sanction of works  by Ministry  of Railways  through annual  budget  
documents , each sanctioned  work  shall be assigned unique  Project -ID as per ID -
Protocol, detailed in the application . 
Reports  
Following main reports  are generated by the applic ation  
I) Works  Progress  (Vol. I, II  & III) –all plan head /specific plan head  
II) Works  Programme  Vol. IV  
III) WIP for PWP  
IV) Works  Prog ramme  Index  Report  
V) Works  Programme  Justification  Report  
VI) LAW (List  of Approved  Works ) Book Report  
VII) Throw Forward Ratio Report  
VIII) Funds  Availability (Allocation  wise) and Sanction  Limit Report  
IX) Ceiling Limit Report  (For each plan head  – for New  Works /Works in 
Progress ) 
X) Exception  Report  (along with Exception Report summary)  
XI) Exception  Report  – Exception Reports /Excep tion Reports based on 
norms ,  including  Summary  (With option to select different 
parameters ) 
XII) List of All Works  
XIII) Additional  Members  Meetings’ Minutes  
XIV)  Pre-Board  Meetings’ Minutes   
XV) Minutes  of Meeting  for Shortlisting of proposals  
XVI)  Board  Meetings’ Minutes  
XVII)  Works  in Progress  – Plan Head  Wise Summary  
XVIII)  Deleted Works  – Summary/List  of Deleted Works  
XIX)  DRM /CWM  Ceiling Limit History  
XX) Rate Reference for Track  Renewal  
XXI)  Executive  Agency  Report   
XXII)  Status of Work  Report  (with option to filter like Active Works (New -
WIP), Completed Works, Regular /Out of turn work  etc.) 
XXIII)  List of Targeted Works  
XXIV)  Target  for Completion  – Allocation  wise Balances  
XXV)  Exception  Report  for Monthly  Progress  Updation  
XXVI)  Customized Report  (Providing facility to a user to select/include 
different aspects/parts of a project in the report)  
XXVII)  Railway  Board  References – Circular /Letters of Railway 
Administration  
XXVIII)  Passenger  Amenities  Data /Details – of a particular station  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
182 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.2 Bridge  Management  System  (BMS)  
Indian  Railway  (Civil  Engineering  Department ) Bridge  Management  System  is a 
web based platform, developed and managed by Centre  for Railway Information  
Systems  (CRIS ) using Java, WAS,  IBM DB2 database, AIX (OS) software  to 
store  bridg e master data, inspection /monitoring , maintenance  related 
information/data of the bridges  and other essentials.  
The application  has  a provision to  capture  master details of the bridges  over 
different divisions  of Indian  Railway  like division, section  of the bridge , structure 
type of bridge  (Box/Slab/Pipe/Arch/RCC/PSC girder /Steel  girder /Composite  
girder  etc.), bridge  category (minor/major /important), location of bridge  (From 
To kms), line  details (including gradient details), their inspections , authority  who 
constructed the bridge , ownership of bridges , authority  who maintain s the 
structure of the bridges , whether maintenance  agreement applicable, width of 
structure, protective screen details (if applicable), guard rails details (if 
applicable) etc., uploading drawing  (sub/su per structure etc.) of bridges  etc. 
Application  has also provision to capture details of Railway  Affecting Works  
(RAW)28 like work  name, their description, contact details, locat ion of RAW, 
uploading files  of the works  etc. 
Further, the application  has a provision to capture confirmation of bridges  
inspection , ADEN  bridge  inspection, inspection of Railway  Affecting Works , 
capture compliance  to defects  pertaining to bridges  and Railway Affecting Works 
(RAW).  
Following reports  are generated by the application :- 
I) Bridge  Register  (Water  ways ), Bridge Register (Other than 
waterways)(With option to filter data)  
II) Past Inspection  Record Repor t 
III) ADEN  Bridge  Inspection  Report  
IV) ADEN  Bridge  Inspection  Defect/Compliance  Report  
V) ADEN  Bridge  Inspection  CRN29 (Condition Rating Number) Report  
VI) Railway  Affecting Works  Master  (Register ) 
VII) Railway  Affecting Works  Inspection  Report  
VIII) Bridge  Waterway Level Report  
IX) Bridge  Master  Analysis  – Category  Wise bridges  data filled /Not filled, 
Usage Type Wise bridges  data filled/Not filled, Structure Type Wise 
                                                           
28 Railway  Affecting Works  generally mean any work  which if not constructed and maintained properly or not 
operated properly may result in danger to Railway Line  (bridges /embankment)  
29 NRS – Numeric Rating System , URN – Unique Rating Number indicate physical  condition of a bridge , CRN - 
Condition Rating System is assigned to different component, ORN -Overall Rating Num ber of a bridge  is given for 
whole of bridge  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
183 
For internal use of IA&AD  bridges  data filled/Not filled, Drawing  of bridges  Uploaded/Not loaded, 
Bridges data confirmed/Unconfirmed in a  particular jurisdiction  
6.3 Integrated  Payroll  & Accounting System  (IPAS ) 
In this IT  application , the main items of Audit  importance, pertaining to 
Engineering  Department , are as under: - 
I) Budgeting  
II) Works  Register  
III) CO-6 Register  
IV) CO-7 Register  
V) Contractor’s ledger  
VI) Contractor’s bills  passing details  
VII) Various deductions made from contractor’s bills  
VIII) Status of validity of Bank  Guarantees /FDRs.  
6.4 Track  management  system  (TMS ) 
Track  Management  System  is a web  bases system  of Indian  Railways , 
developed/managed by CRIS  using Java, WAS,  IBM DB2 database, AIX (OS) 
software , for the management  of track  inventory  assets , inspections , monitoring  
and maintenance  of track  by decentralized data capturing, centralized data 
maintenance /keeping  and dissemination of information through various reports  
pertaining to inspections , maintenance  and management  of tracks.  The 
application  covers almost all track  maintenance  related activities.  
The different application  modules  and activities covered  by them are briefed as 
under: - 
Assets  Module: -This module  facilita tes capturing of details/data of various track  
assets  with facility to edit/delete the same.  Track  assets  and related particulars 
which the application  has provision to capture are as under: -  
I) Rail –Rail Location, Rail section , Grade  of steel, Month & year of rolling, 
month  & year of lying, supplier name, GMT carried at laying etc.  
II) Track  Type  – Location, Track  Type, Weld  type etc.  
III) Joggled Fish  Plated Weld  –Drawing  No., Length, whether 
clamped/bolted etc.  
IV) Weld  – Weld Type, plant, Panel  Number, Dimensional Tolerance on Joint  
etc. 
V) Sleepers  – Sleeper  type, sleeper density, supplier, lying date, GMT 
carried at lying etc.  
VI) Fastening  – Type, Drawing  Number, Year of insertion etc.  
VII) SEJ – SEJ No., Supplier name, SEJ Dr awing  No., Rail  section , sleeper 
type, grade of steel, coldest/hottest temperature, design  gap etc.  
VIII) LWR  – Type of weld , Installation date, temperature, Destre ssing date etc.  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
184 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) Point & Crossing  – Type of P&C, date of lying, Date of last temping, date 
of last deep screening, direction, joint type, track  circuited, motor 
operated etc.,  
X) Curve  –Type of curve, Guage , Radius of curve, degree etc.  
XI) Buffer Rail  – No. of buffer rails, type of fastening, length/initial gap  etc. 
XII) Ballast  – Type of ballast, Size of ballast, month  & year of last deep 
screening, deep screen ing method etc.  
XIII) Formation30 - Soil type, Bank/Cutting, Year of construction , Height of 
bank /depth of cutting, Cess width, side slope of bank  cutting, existence of 
borrow pit, distance of borrow pit from toe of the bank etc.  
XIV)  Level Crossing - Manned/Unmanned, Gate  electrified or not, visibility of 
train from LC, Type of road surface, whether connected to village or not, 
whether board provided for road user, nearest hospital , date of 
overhauling /painting of line  etc. 
XV) Land  Boundary  – Land Boundary post  Number, distance of boundary 
post from nearest line  etc. 
XVI)  Glued Joint  – Glued Jo int No., Glued Joint Type, Location, Lying date, 
manufactured by, supplied by etc.  
XVII)  Sand Hump  – Sand hump on turnout, Rail  section , sleeper type, sleeper 
density etc.  
XVIII)  Fish Plated Joint  – Left/Right  rail, Fist plated joint length, drawing  
number, No. of bolts etc.  
XIX)  Cross Over /Emergency  Cross Over  – First turnout, second turnout, 
cabin, direction, maintained by, number etc.  
XX) OHE  Mast – OHE Mast Number, Chainage etc.  
XXI)  Loop line /Yard  line/Siding  –Name, CSR , total length of ATS, 
starting/ending of turnout, speed  over loop line, line type, PF /Non -PF line, 
is electrified,  
XXII)  Platform/Washable Apron Details of Main line  –Station , PF/Non -PF 
line, length/height of platform , washable  apron.  
XXIII)  Track  Space – Location, track  spacing between lines.  
Inspection  Module:  This module  has provision to capture inspection  details like 
period of inspection, results of inspection etc. of track  assets31 
Plann ing Module : The application  allows Inspecting Authority  (PWI etc.) to 
plan inspections  and track  maintenance  related activities.  
                                                           
30 Includes Formation, Protection  Work , Drainage System , Erosion Control  Measures, weak Formation, 
Formation Treatment  
31 like Ballast , Curve , ERC  (ToE Load), Fastening, Inspection  & Fish  Plated Joint  Oiling and Greasing, Foot Plate, 
Glued Joint, Land  Bound ary, LWR /CWR, SEJ , On Foot, Point & Crossing  (Detailed , intermediate, Joint), Rail , 
Rear Vehicle , Sand Hump, Small Track  Machine , Track Machine, Trolley (push, moped, motor) etc.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
185 
For internal use of IA&AD  Work Module: The module  facilitates capturing/updation of data pertaining to 
different work  done such as general compliance  to the defects  noticed during 
inspection , last tamping data, changes made in the assets32,  daily gang work  
including their attendance ,  feedback on Inspection  and Oiling & Greasing of Fish  
Plated weld , Joggled Fish Plated Weld , Ballast  work ,33 Ballast deep screening 
(Plain Track ), turnout deep screening (Tamping), work  done by External Agency , 
LWR  Distressing, A T Weld requires joggling, Level Crossing  data augmentation 
details,  Through Formation Treatment  Renewal , Through Bridge  Timber 
Renewal, linking  of deep screening done by BCM Machines  with sanctioned  
works , construction  of blast less track , rail painting in field/track . 
Stores  Module (Beta Versio n): This module  facilitates maintenance  of ledger  
masters, opening balances, gate  pass, issue  note (without gate  pass), material  
receipt /issue , material  in transit, ART  (Accident  Relief  Train )34 Put-in/Taken -Out 
Register , Put-in/Taken -out for Contractor, Material  (Load) return to store  (Staff ), 
Material Ledger /Location Transfer , Ledger Adjustment , Non -TMS  Issue  Note 
Verification , Ma terial Identification , material  break/join, prepare/acceptance 
adjustment memo, obsolete material  declaration etc.  
Innovation Module: This module  provides Innovation Reports /details of 
technical  suggestions.  
PCDO  Module: The module  facilitates users to capture details pertaining to 
various annexure of PCDO and generates PCDO and reports  such as PCDO target 
and PCDO progress.   
Miscellaneous  Module: This module  has facilities such as Message  Centre  (for 
communicating messages), circulars35, contact details (of officials of Engin eering  
department),   Inspection  Notes  uploaded by Level users, Inspection Notes of 
higher officials, Rail  Fall Register , Temperature Register, Historical Weld  
Fracture etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
32like Rail , weld , Through Sleeper  Renewal , Through Fastening Renewal, Weld /Joint  change/addition, Point & 
Crossing  change/addition, SEJ /Buffer Rail change/addition, Curve  change etc.  
33 Leading/Training  out of Blast, Track  Deep Screening (Manual ), Turnout Deep Screening, Overhauling  
34Material  Receipt  (DMTR Receipt/Material in Transit ), Gate  Pass  from ART , Issue  Note without Gate Pass, 
Consumed from ART etc.  
35 Railw ay Board  circulars  and other important letters, Chief  Engineers  circulars  and other important instructions  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
186 
For internal use of IA&AD  Reports: TMS  generates number of reports .  A few of them are as under: - 
Assets  Register  Reports36,  Assets Change Report37, List  of Ass ets Pending  for 
Confirmation Report, Assets Lock/Unlock Status Report, Gap Between Assets 
Change and its Confirmation Report, Compliance  Report,   Crack Analysis  
Report38,  Deep Screening Analysis39, Due/Ov erdue Shallow Screening Report, 
Employee Report40, Engineering  Control  Reports41, Fish  Plated Joint  Analysis 
Report, Joggled Fish Plated Weld  (Oil & Greasing) Report, Fracture Report42,  
Gang Report43, Gap of SEJ , General  Compliance Report, Joggling Analysis (AT 
Weld), Inspection  Reports44, Land  Reports45, Location Needing Inspection, 
Location Needing Attention, LC Overhauling  Analysis, LC State /Constituency 
wise Summary, LWR  De-stressing,  Miscellaneous  Registers46, Monsoon 
Reserve  Report, OMS , OHE   Mast, Site  Particulars, Technical  Suggestions, 
Track  Diagram ( Abridged, Detailed , Abridged2), Track Machine  Reports47, 
Track Maintenance  Planning  Reports48, Track Stat istics49, TRC Report/Analysis, 
Unusual Incidents Analysis/Reports – Unusual Incident Analysis, Unusual 
                                                           
36 Ballast  Register , Buffer Rail  Register, Drainage Work  Register, Erosion Control  Register, Fastening, Fish  Plated 
Joint  Register, Formation, Formation Treatment  Register, Land  Boundary Register, LWR  Register, Protection  
Work Register, Rail Register,  SEJ  Register, Weld  Register etc.  
37 Rail Change Report , Slee per Change Report, Ballast  Change Report, Fastening Change Report, Weld /Joint  
Change Report, LWR  Change Report, SEJ /Buffer Rail Change Report, Level Crossing  Change Report,  Curve  
Change Report  
38Rail Section  Wise, Sleeper  Wise, Rail Location/Weld  Type Wise, GMT Wise, Age Wise, Comparison  Wise  
39Deep Screening, Over due Deep screening Analysis  (Track ), Overdue  Deep Screening Analysis (Turnout) (Beta 
version)  
40Staff  Details, Periodical  Medical  Examination  Overdue Report , Training  Overdue Report  
41Position of power  provided, Cases of accident /derailment and special  feature, cases of rail /weld  fracture, Position 
of RF/WF /IMR, Mega block  planned/done, Position of Train  detention , Position of PQRS/TRT , Work  site position 
of Track  Renewal , Position of Rail  Panel  DMTs, Position of Loose BRHs, Position of PRC Rakes, Position of 
Ballast  DMTs, Time consumed on ER, Minimum/Maximum Rail Temperature, Night  Foot plate Inspection , 
TRC/OMS  Recording,  Temporary  Speed  Restriction etc.  
42Fracture Analysis , KM Wise Fracture Analysis, LWR  Wise Fracture Analysis  
43Gang Missing Data  Entry, Gang Strength , Gang Usage, Gang  Work , List  of Work  
44Inspection  Analysis , Inspection Chart, Inspection Planning , Inspection Register , Inspection Overdue, Inspection 
due, Gap between Inspection  and Confirmation, Offline Inspection Analysis, Offline Inspection Survey , Keyman 
Morning Inspection, Inspection Top Sheet , Track  Machine , Small Track Machine  
45Land  Management , Vacant Land Parcel , Land Plan  Analysis , Way Leave  
46Creep Register , Gap Register, Critical Location, Gradiant, ODC , Rail  Fall, Speed  Restriction (Permanent , 
Temporary , Summary), Temperature, External Agency  Work , GMT Details, Circular  Viewed, Bridge  Water  Level, 
Special  Work, Sanctioned  Proposal, Rail Painting  
47Progress  (Machine  wise), Progress (Detailed ), Progress (Summary), No Work  Reason (Summary), Progress 
(Summary), Machine I dle, Missing Data  Entry, Missing Data Summary, Progress (On Date),  Progress in Mega 
Block , Machine Availability, Machine (Type wise), Machine Utilization (Report -1, Report -2), Night  Working, 
Machine Target  v/s Actual, Yearly  Summary, Machine Under  Report, Tamping Chart, Machine Availability 
Summary,  
48Track  Degradation Model , Last Tamping Details, Due/Overdue Tamping, Tamping Chart , Statistics  based on 
Condition, Track Health  Monitoring  Chart, Rail  Analysis , Rail Analysis (GMT wise), LWR  wise Weld  Input  
49Annual  Track  Statistics , Platform/Washable Apron Details on Main line  in Station  Area, Route /Track Kilometer, 
Turnout Statistics, Track Spacing  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
187 
For internal use of IA&AD  Incidents Report, User Analysis – Inspection and Work  Summary, Performance  
Report, System  Usage Analysis, USFD  Reports50, Welding  of Rails  (AT 
Welding51,  FB Welding – Agency  Wise FB Welding Machines , FBW Workshop  
– Date wise Progress ). 
Stores  Module  Report : Stores Register  Report52, Scrap  Reports , Periodical  
Returns, Material  Master  Report, Release  Order List , Obsolete Material, Report 
of Scale  & Deficiency.  
6.5 Indian  Railways  E-Procurement  System  (IREPS ) 
This is official portal  of Indian  Railways  for procurement  of Goods , e-tendering  
of Works & Services , Sale  of Materials , and Leasing  of Assets  through the process 
of E-Tendering , E-auction  or Reverse  Auction . 
The site is compliant to IT  Act 2000 and follows the instructions / guidelines  
issued by Ministry  of Railways  from time  to time  for procurement , sale and 
leasing . The site provides a secure platform to users for online  transactions for 
procurement  and sale. The site caters to requirements of all Zonal  Railways and 
Production  Units  of Indian  Railways , and is also being used by PSUs  like Konkan  
Railway  Corporation  Limited  (KRCL ), and Delhi  Metro  Rail Corporation 
(DMRC) etc.  
For Audit  purpose, we can get the details of tenders  floated by Engineering  
Department . 
7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS -CHECK LIST  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines - 4.9- Criteria or benchmarks used to evaluate or 
measure the subject mat ter consistently and reasonably are  -  
a) Relevant, b) Reliable, c) Complete, d) Objective , e) Understandable, f) 
Comparable, g) Acceptable & h) Available 4.10 Understanding in ternal  controls, 
4.11 Materiality, 4.13 Risk  assessment  and 4.17  Compliance  Audit  Design  
Matrix ) 
                                                           
50DFWR Analysis , USFD  Defects (USFD Defects -Route /Jurisdiction wise, Month wise) USFD Due/Overdue (Rail  
Testing , AT Weld  Testing, USFD Defects History , USFD Progress , USFD Report , USFD Test Analysis, USFD Test 
Report, USFD Test Free Length, USFD Defects 4 Meters, USFD Defects on Bridges , WSFD Workload, Certified 
USFD Operator (Departmental , Agency ), Certified USFD Mac hines  
51 Agency  wise Certified Welder, Agency Welder’s Performance  Analysis , Departmental  Certified Welder, 
Departmental/Agency Welder Performance Analysis  
52 Material  Receipt  Register , Issue  Register, Material Released from Track , Consumed in Track, Ledger  Balances 
as on date/post  date, Ledger Transaction Record, To ol & Plants  Ledger Transaction Record, Issue Note List , 
Adjustment  Memo  List, Material Balance  (Location wise), Material in Transit , Material on Loan , Dead  Stock  
(Material not in use)  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
188 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.1 Works  Programme  
Works  programmes are financial  investment  proposals relating to creation, 
acquisition  and replacement  of assets  on the basis of which Railway  Board  would 
provide appropriate  funds under various heads of accounts . Works and projects  
approved  by the Railway Board  are included under Approved Annual  Works 
Programme  and Works approved by the GM  of Zonal  Railways  included under 
LAW. ( Chapter VI of Indian  Railway Engineering  Code ). 
During Audit  of Works  Programme , following should be seen:  
I) that the works  are proposed with due planning , 
II) that the work  are proposed after carrying out feasibility  survey ; and  
III) that the work  are proposed with full justification . 
7.2 Sanctions   
Works  sanctions  
Sanctions  to be dealt with in the Engineering  Branch  will generally relate to 
estimates  or completion  reports  and for the incurrence of other special  items of 
expenditure  which are covered  by ordinary rules  and have, therefore, to be 
sanctioned  by competent  authority . The arrangements in force for the receipt  and 
audit  of sanctions  accorded by the General  Manager  should be specially reviewed, 
with a view to ensure that such sanctions come under audit scrutiny without any 
omission.  
Following checks  may be exercised during Audit  of works  sanctions :  
I) All sanctions  and ord ers involving financial  considerations are endorsed 
by the Finance  Department , wherever necessary.  
II) Sanctions  are issued under the signature  of the officers concerned i n ink  
and not over cyclostyled  signatures . 
III) Sanctions  are financially justified duly satisfying the Standards  (canons) 
of financial  propriety  (Para  116 of F-I). 
IV) The sanctioning authority  is competent  to do so as per the Schedule  of 
Powers.  
V) The currency  of sanction to an estimate  is ordinarily for five years from 
the date of according sanction. Currency needs to be renewed by 
preparing revised estimate and approved  by competen t authority .(756-E). 
Other sanctions  
Other sanctions  include ex -gratia pa yments to contractors , payment of taxes  to 
municipalities or local  bodies etc., write off  of losses, payments arising out of 
arbitration  award . Ordinarily s anctions accorded by a competent  authority  remain 
valid for the specified period for which they are accorded. It is, however, essential 
to review such sanctions periodically to see that the conditions attaching thereto 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
189 
For internal use of IA&AD  are duly fulfilled before expenditure  incurred there under is finally admitted  in 
audit .  
Following checks  may be exercised during Audit  of other sanctions : 
I) Sanctions  to the write off  of losses should be completely investigated and 
traced into the Register  of losses or the Register of Serious Irregularities 
maintained by the Accounts  Office  so that all matters requiring further 
departmental  consideration are promptly brought to notice.  
II) During Audit  of sanctions  for payments arising out of arbitration  award  it 
should be seen:  
a) that proper legal  and financial  advice was obtained before deciding on 
the necessity for arbitrations and that the points for arbitration  were 
reduced to specific terms and  were not in any way left ambiguous or 
vague;  
b) that the Railway ’s case was properly prepared and presented, utilising 
all available evidence for the purpose and that there was no joint 
submission with the contractor;  
c) that the points of defen ce were based on the actual conditions of the 
contract ; the question whether these conditions were equitable  should 
have no consideration in preparing the Railway ’s case;  
d) that claims of the nature of ‘ex -gratia’ payments did not form a matter 
for settlement by arbitration , and if such claims were pressed by the 
contractor, they were finally opposed and the fact they were not 
contractual was prominently placed before the arbitrator;  
e) that arbitration  was not rendered necessary on account  of any lack of 
precision in terms of the contract ;  
f) that adequate steps were taken by Administration  to rectify any 
defects  in procedure which might have come to light;  
7.3 Preparation  and Approval  of Drawing  Estimates  
 Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para  1 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.4 Works  Executed on Deposit  Terms  
I) The works  executed by Railways  on behalf of other Government  
Departments , municipa lities and other local  bodies, private  firms and 
individuals fall under this category.  
II) The "Deposit  Works " are the works  of construction  or repair, the cost  of 
which is met, not out of Railway  funds, but out of funds  from non -railway  
sources on whose behalf the works  are executed by the Railways . (Para 
1843 – E) 
 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
190 
For internal use of IA&AD  During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) A register  containing the complete list of all Deposit  Works  being 
undertaken in a Division  is maintained in the Divisional  office ( Para 1852 
– E) 
II) Proper  memorandum of understanding (MOU ) is executed by the parties  
III) Proper  consent of the party is obtained for accepting percentage  charge of 
preparation of plans  and estimates  (Para 732 – E) 
IV) Departmental  charges  at 12.50% of the total outlay  are levied (cf. Para 
1137 – E) 
V) In case of waiver wholly or partly of the above charges  by the GM , the 
conditions laid  down for such waiver is fulfilled ( Para 1138 – E) 
VI) The Estimate  is accepted by the p arties before submission of the same to 
the approval  of competent  Railway  authority . 
VII) The acceptance of the parties is obtained to bear the recurring expenditure  
that i s incurred on repairs , maintenance  etc., in cases of works  which are 
to be maintained by the Railways  after completion . 
VIII) The work  is not commenced till a deta iled estimate  is accepted by the 
concerned department and sanctioned  by the competent  Railway  authority  
and the estimated cost  thereof deposited by the par ty (Para  735 – E). 
IX) The deposited amount is credited  to the head  “Deposit  – Miscellaneo us” 
and the expenditure  debited  thereof.  
X) Timely additional  allotment is obtained from the party in case where an 
excess is anticipated during the execution  of the work . (Para 1846 – E) 
7.5 Review of Tenders  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance wit h para 2  of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.6 Advances  to Contractors  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 3 of chapter of  ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.7 Review of On Account  Bills , Final Bills  and Completed Contracts  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 4 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.8 Audit  of Measurement  Books  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 5 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.9 Material  Modification  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 6 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit ’. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
191 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.10 Contractors’ Ledger  
(see para 1483 -E) 
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 7 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.11 Completion  Reports /Completion Estimates /Completion Statements  
(see para 1701 -1714 -E)   
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 8 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.12 Works  Registers and Rev enue  Allocation  Registers  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 9 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.13 Arbitration  Award s 
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 10 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.14 Pay Order and Other Vouchers  Not Falling Under  Any Definite Category  
(Miscellaneous  Vouchers)  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 11 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.15 Audit  of Journal  Vouchers  
(See Paras  CF. 307 & 308 -A1) 
Its Audit  may b e conducted in accordance with Para 12 of chapter of ‘Works  
Audit’.  
7.16 Objectionable Items Register  
Its Audit  may be condu cted in accordance with  Para 9.2.4  of Chapter on Audit of 
Accounts  Department .  
7.17 Assisted  Siding  
(See Paras  1822 -1842 E ) 
Assisted  siding may be provided by the Railway  administration to serve a 
Factory , colliery  or other industrial establishments subject to the following: – 
I) The land  cost outside the applicants premises is borne by the applicant but 
the ownership should vest absolutely in Railways ; 
II) The budget  to cover the cost  of survey  and preparation of Plans and 
estimates  should be made by the applicant;  
III) The siding owner will have to bear the cost  towards annual  Interest and 
maintenance  charges  of track ; 
IV) The incidence  of the cost  of the assisted sidings  as between the Railway  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
192 
For internal use of IA&AD  Administration  and the applicant should be in accordance with the 
following general pr inciples : -  
a) Outside the applicant's premises, the cost  of all works  which would 
have to be abandoned in the event of the siding being closed, e.g., 
earthwork , bridges  (exclusi ve of girders ), culverts ballast, buildings , 
etc., should be borne by the applicant,  
b) Outside the applicant's premises, the cost  of all works  which would be 
removed by the Railway  Administration  in the event of the siding 
being closed, e.g., sleepers, rails, fastenings , points and crossings , 
girders  of bridges , fencing, signalling  and inter -locking  appliances 
and machinery of any kind, should be borne by the Railway 
Administration;  
c) The entire cost  of the siding within the applicant's premises should be 
borne by the applicant;   
In cases of sidings  constructed for private  parties/Govt . departments , the 
following Audit  checks  may be exercised  that –  
I) The revenue expected is sufficient to c over the interest  and maintenance  
charges  etc., 
II) All items of capital  or revenue expenditure  which are recoverable  from 
the applicant are shown in t he estimate  and accepted,  
III) In the case of estimate  for sidings  and deposit  terms, one of the important 
points to be borne in mind is that any credit  to capital  on account  of the 
removal of any existing railway  asset  has no effect of reducing the cost  of 
work  chargeable  to the parties,  
IV) Valid agreement containing all the d etails as per codal  provisions is in 
existence,  
V) The charges  towards maintenance  and interest  are being recovered 
promptly,  
VI) The annual  examination of the earnings  of each siding is made by the 
Railway  Administration  to ascertain whether the sidings  are working 
profitably,  
VII) In the case of loss  of revenue earnings  due to non -offer ing of quantum of 
traffic  projected in the estimate  and as agreed by the applicant and the 
sidings  is found to be working not profitably, the details of action  taken 
by the Railway  administration to close/dismantle the siding are verified 
to see that the instructions  contained in para 1833 -E are observed,  
VIII) The local  tariff of Railways will contain particulars of all assisted sidings  
over which traffic  is hauled by the Railway .  A comparison  of the list of 
assisted sidi ngs listed in the Goods tariff may bring out omissions which 
should be followed up,  
IX) Apart from the interest  and maintenance  charges  on the cost  of sidings , 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
193 
For internal use of IA&AD  the recovery towards the cost  of staff  engaged on the siding and/or interest  
and maintenance  charges  for using other Railways  assets  by the siding  
owners is ensured,  
X) The sidings  on the different railways are not at all worked under the 
assisted siding terms laid  down in Paras  1824 to 1838 -E.  When special  
terms exist for the working of the sidings , it should be seen whether it is 
not possible to get these sidings  as well under the assisted siding te rms so 
as to secure uniformity, and  
XI) The entries contained in the sidings  register  maintained in the Accounts  
Office  are being duly verified annually with statements of sidings  
obtained from the District or Divisional  Engineers  as mentioned in Para  
1840 -E. 
7.18 Abandoned  Assets  
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) When the dismantlement or abandonment of an existing work  is involved, 
the original cost  (the cost  at debit  of Capital , Development  Fund ) is 
written back from Capital/ Development fund and debited  to Depreciation  
Reserve  Fund,  
II) Reasonable provision is made for cr edits  on account  of released materials  
due to dismantlement / abandonment of an asset . (Paras  704 (i) and 788 
(c) – F-I), and  
III) Works  which are abandoned soon after construction  due to having lost  
their utility or not having served the purpose for which they were designed 
should be specially brought to notice and the loss  to Government  
determined.  
7.19 Maintenance  and Renewal  of Assets  
Track  Renewal  works  
BG Track  is classified  in to seven groups and MG track  in to Five groups based 
on the Maximum permissible speed  of the trains  running  on the track  (Para 202 
IRPWM ). 
Apart from annual  maintenance , periodicity  of complete overhauling  of tracks to 
be done is within a specific period of three to five years { Para 203 (2) IRPWM }. 
Following are the types of track  renewal : 
I) Complete track  renewal  (CTR) -Primary & Secondary  
II) Through Rail  Renewal  (TRR ) -Primary and Secondary  
III) Through Sleeper  Renewal  (TSR ) -Primary and Secondary  
IV) Through Ballast  Renewal  (TBR)  
V) Through Weld R enewal  (TWR)  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
194 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Through Fittings Renew al (TFR)  
VII) Through Bridge  Timber Renewal  (TBTR)  
VIII) Through Turn out Renewal  (TTR)  
IX) Through Glued Joints Renewal  (TGJR)  
X) Through SEJ  Renewal  (TSEJR)  
During A udit of execution  of Track  Renewal  works , it is to be seen whether:  
In addition to the checks  conducted during audit  of tenders  and con tracts , 
following checks  should be exercised:  
I) The engineer in charge has proposed the renewal  after carrying out 
complete inspection  of the condition of the track  through an nual 
maintenance  programme , 
II) Inspection  reports  of engineers about the condition of the track  are on 
records,  
III) The Estimated quantities are projected as per  actual requirement with 
reference to specifications  and codal  provisions ( Para 244, 248 IRPWM ), 
IV) The possibilities of using released material  are considered diligently,  
V) Proper accountal of receipt  and usage of fresh materials  and also of 
released materials  has been done,  
VI) Promp t disposal  of released scrap  material  is done,  
VII) The delivery of scrap / released material  has been made to successful 
bidder  as per delivery order and also under th e witness of Accounts  and 
RPF personnel,  
VIII) Govt . levies and cost  of material  found in excess of offered lot, has been 
collected before handing over of scrap , 
IX) Optimum  utilisation of Track  Machines  has been done during the Block  
granted, and  
X) Delay in completion  of work  may be analysed with reference to continued 
speed  restrictions.  
7.20 Maintenance  of Station  and Service  Buildings  
During Audit  of records for maintenance  of stations  and service  buildings , it 
should be seen that:  
I) Station  and Service  building  are being maintained to the satisfactory level 
observing the safety  aspect of the building  as well as staff , 
II) Periodical  inspections  by Engineering  officers are being done as per 
norms , 
III) System  of recovery of rent  and allied charges  of the Railway  buildings  let 
out to outsiders and other Government  Departments , is in place,  
IV) Rent  and allied charges  in respect of buildings  let out to outsiders and 
other Govt . Departments  is being raised and realised as per latest 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
195 
For internal use of IA&AD  directives, and  
V) Interest on delayed payments is being realised.  
7.21 Maintenance  of Residential  and Office  Buildings : 
During Audit  of records relating to maintenance  of residential  and office 
buildings , it should be seen as to wh ether:  
I) Residential  accommodations  are provided as per demand and in time  
without any unnecessary delay,  
II) The quarters  are classified  correctly according to the plint h measurement , 
III) Quarters  are allotted to the staff  according to the standard of the 
accommodation approved  for various classes of the staff , 
IV) The rent  and allied c harges  are recovered at the rates prescribed  by 
Railway  Board  from time  to time ,  
V) Water  charges  to be recovered from the occupa nts of the quarters  are 
revised from time  to time  as per Railway  Board ’s directives,  
VI) Review of estimation made for requirement of water  for residential  
buildings  as per norms  prescribed  in Para 504 of Indian  Railway  Works  
Manual , and  
VII) Check  of payment made for Water Bills  received from the Municipal  
Authorities/ State  Government  or any other water  supplying Authority . 
7.22 Capital  and Revenue  Account  of Residential  Building  
These accounts  are prepared by the Divisional  Finance  Manager .  During 
the Audit , it should be seen as to whether :  
I) All new  residential  building  constructed during a particular year are taken  
in to the account , 
II) The cost  of additions/ maintenance  to the existing residential  building  are 
taken into the account , 
III) Necessary write back  adjustments  of the cost  of dismantled  quarters  are 
made from the concerned head  of accounts  during the same year of 
dismantlement,  
IV) The quarters  are allotted to staff  without any unnecessary delay,  
V) Realisation of requisite percentage  of return in respect of each class of 
quarters  is ensured (6% of the total cost  of all that qu arters in a particular 
class – Para 1906 E ), 
VI) The cost  of repairs  and maintenance  of the residential  building  is not 
exceeded the cost  of its replacement , and  
VII) The recovery of allied charges  is proportionate  to the amount paid to t he 
Municipality  and other authorities . 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
196 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.23 Maintenance  of Other Staff  Amenities  Such as Schools , Hospitals, Institutes  
Etc. 
During t he Audit , it should be seen as to whether :  
I) The expenditure  on existing schools and Institutes  incurred during a 
particular year are not exceeding the sanctioned  budget  provisions,  
II) Prior  sanction of Railway  board is obtained for all expenditure  proposed 
to be incurred on the existing schools and Institutes  in excess of the 
provisions in the sanctioned  budget , and  
III) Any new  Railway  schools/ i nstitute  are opened without the prior sanction 
of the Railway Board . 
IV) Along with the check of expenditure , realization of receivables such as 
fees, rent , licence fee etc. needs to be checked as these constitute reduction 
in expenditure . 
7.24 Maintenance  of Passenger  Amenities  
During the Audit , it should be seen as to whether all the expenditure  incurred on 
providing amenities  for passengers  and other railway  users are within the 
sanctio ned provisions and booked to the relevant head  of account . Analysis  of 
standards / items of amenities  fixed  by Board  from time  to time  as per category of 
stations  and their compliance  needs to be added.  
7.25 Maintenance , Renewal  and Rehabilitation  of Railway  Bridges  
During the Audit , it should be seen as to whether :  
I) System  of Inspection  of Bridges  is in place.  
II) System  of underwater Inspection  of Bridges  is in place.  
III) All bridges  are inspected twice in a year, one before the onset of monsoon 
and another after the monsoon.  
IV) Identification  of outlived bridges  requiring repair/s trengthening/ 
rehabilitation /rebuilding is made.  
V) Bridges requiring immediate attention are classified  as distressed  bridges . 
VI) Timeliness for planning , execution  and completion  of bridge  works  with 
proper monitoring  of progress is ensured and delay in this regard to be 
commented.  
VII) Speed  restrictions are promptly removed after attention of bridge  works  
VIII) There is no Elongation  of speed  restriction due to delay in execution  of 
bridge  works . 
IX) There is no under -utilisatio n of costly equipment  purchased for bridge  
works . 
X) L-xing has been eliminated, if RUB /ROB /LHS has been constructed, to 
eliminate it, so as to save cost  of staff  deployed on it.  
XI) Compliance  to latest orders regarding maintenance , inspection  and repairs  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
197 
For internal use of IA&AD  of bridges , outsourcing  of structural  audit  of structures  by renowned 
experts etc. needs to be checked.  
7.26 Land  Management  
Land management  covers a broad  scope  of activities which in cludes proper 
maintenance  of land  records, control  of land  use, detection , prevention and 
removal of encroachments , maintenance  of la nd boundaries, utilisation of land 
for various purposes by licensing /leasing  to other organisations/parties for 
commercial  and other uses including afforestation etc.  
Railway  land  falls under any of the following categories:  
I) Permanent  land, which is required for its use and the title of which is 
transferred permanently in the name of Railways . 
II) Temporary  land, which is acquired for temporary purposes such as for 
spoil -banks, side -cuttings, quarries, stacking and preparation of material , 
temporary offices, workshops  and quarters . 
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) The land  acquired for temporary purposes is disposed off after the 
construction  work  is completed.  
II) Separate  Land  Management  Cells are in existence in Zones and in 
Divisions . 
III) Proper  training  is imparted to the officials posted in the land  cell. 
IV) The land  plans  are certified by t he Revenue  authorities  digitalised and 
computerised duly ensuring that all land  plans  are available.  
V) The land  required for the projects  is acquired and taken poss ession in time  
clearing all the encumbrances and handed it over to user department 
without delay.  
VI) Land record registers  are maintained at Zonal , Divisional  and filed levels 
showing the data r egarding land  holding, land  plans , vacant land, 
encroachments  etc.  
VII) Adequate action  has been taken to evict the encroachers and to avoid fresh 
encroachment.  
VIII) Adequate action  has been taken to clear cases under Public  Premises 
(Eviction of unauthorised Occupants) Act  1971 and there is no pendency.  
IX) The decisions taken by the Estate  officers regarding eviction and deposit  
of money are implemented or not.  
X) Land  boundaries are properly demarcated and being maintained.  
XI) Permissions are granted to local  bodies for way leave  facilities and way 
leave  charges  are realised.  
XII) Licensing  of Railway  land was done for Grow More Food scheme.  
XIII) Licensing  and leasing  of Railway  land to other parties for comm ercial  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
198 
For internal use of IA&AD  purposes and other uses including afforestation etc. and recovery of 
license fee.  
XIV)  Railway  land is relinquished  on transfer to or from other State  
Governments etc.  
XV) Whe ther land  licence fee has been fixed  as per latest Railway  Board ’s 
directives, and  
XVI)  Whether interest  on delayed payment has been recovered.  
7.27 Utilisation of Track  Machines  
The Track  machine  Organisation  is under the overall charge of Chief  Track 
Engineer  (Machines ) who is reporting to the Principal  Chief Engineer .  The 
following are the functions : 
I) Field Operation of Track  Machines . 
II) Repair and Maintenance  of Track  Machines . 
III) Supervision and technical  services including training  and  
IV) Planning  and deployment  of machines  
V) Premature  condemnation of Track  Machines  
VI) Deployment  and actual availability of staff  for operation  and maintenance  
of track  machines . 
VII) Monitoring of c onsumption  of HSD  oil with reference to work  done by 
the track  machines . 
(Para  1.1 of  Indian  Railway  Track  Machine  Manual ) 
The track  machines  are utilised for mechanical maintenance  of track .  The an nual 
plan for deployment  of various track  machines  is finalised by the CTE (MC)/CTE 
of the Zonal  Railway  on the basis of the report submitted by the D ivisions  (Para 
205 (2) of IRPWM ) 
During Audit , it should be seen that –  
I) The annual  planning  for the deployment  of track  machines  is devised so 
effectively to ensure that the available track  machines  are optimally 
utilised.  
II) Required line  blocks  are obtained for better working of the machines  i.e., 
4 hours per day or two separate blocks  of 2 1/2 hours each (Para  226 (2) 
(c) of IRPWM ) 
III) The machines  are inspected frequently with the objective  of monitoring  
the health  of machines  
IV) The Zonal  base depot  and/or satellite depots  headed by Assistant  
Engineer /Senior  Engineer for carrying out heavy repairs  and intermediate 
overhauling  are in existence.  
V) Maintenance  of various records and submission of various returns  
pertaining to machines  from the field units  are ensure d. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
199 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) All the staff  are imparted proper training  in maintenance  practices, safety  
and protection  rules  and acquainted with the relevant rules  of operation  
and maintenance  procedures/stipulations connected with Track  machines  
and maintenance  of track . 
VII) AMC  is entered into with OEM  /authorised agent on a single tender  basis 
for carrying out repairs  to the machines  and/or for supply  of spares  
VIII) Special  attention may be made on the followin g details/ documents : 
a) History  registers  of the engine  and the machine  (Log  Book).  
b) Failure  Analysis  register .  
c) Progress  Bar Charts and analysis .  
d) Unit cost statement.  
e) Maintenance  schedule  register .  
f) Inspection  Notes  of higher officers and Compliance  Report  duly 
updated.  
g) Operation and maintenance  manuals  of the machines . 
h) Programme  of deployment  of ma chines . 
IX) Adequate mechanism  is in existence to ensure readiness of the following 
pre-requisites before deploying track  machines  to avoid delay in 
deployment  of machines  
a) Availability of a minimum cushion of 150 mm of clean ballast is 
ensured for the proper functioning of the machine .  
b) Adequate ballast is available in shoulders and cribs to allow for 
required lift  
c) Sanction  of Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  for working of the 
concerned tamping machine  is available.  
d) Traffic  blocks  of adequate duration are planned.  
e) The sleepers are uniformly spaced.  
X) Debits  are being raised against concerned Railway /Division  for utilisation 
of track  Machines . 
XI) Proper  accounts  of imprest  for operation  of track  machines  are 
maintained.  
7.28 Obtaining CRS  Sanction  
Under  section  23 of Railways  Act, 1989 (24 of 1989 ) and chapter VII  of the 
“Railways (Opening for Public  Carriage  of Passengers ) Rules , 2000”, the 
sanctio n of Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  is required –  
I) For the execution  of any work  on the open line , which  will affect the 
running  of trains  carrying passengers  and ever y temporary deviation in 
line necessary for carrying it out, except in cases of emergency . 
II) Permanent  diversion (deviation) of more than 2 km in length without any 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
200 
For internal use of IA&AD  station in between and irrespective of length, when a new  station is 
involved.  
III) Permanent  diversions of more than 2 km in length, and irrespective of 
length when a new  station is involved, are to be treated as new  lines  
covered  by the provisions of section  21 to 23 of the Railways  Act, 1989  
(24 of 1989).  
IV) New  bridges  including road over and under bridges , foot over - bridges , 
strengthening, raising, reconstruction, dismantling or extension of 
existing bridges , addition or replacement  of existing girders , including 
provision of temporary girders .  
(Para 1302 of IRPWM  as amended vide Railway  Board  letter No. 
2006/CE -I/AC -1 (Pt.) dated 23.04.2008)  
During Audit , it should be seen th at –  
I) Whether CRS  sanction has been obtained, wherever it is required, as per 
existing norms . 
II) The CRS  final report should be reviewed to see that –  
a) The recommendations  are complied with in time . 
b) The circumstances under which such lapses as reported by the CRS  
are not anticipated and done during execution  of a project/ work  
c) The expenditure  involved in carrying out the lap ses pointed out by the 
CRS  does not exceed the cost  of sanctioned  estimate  requiring 
approval  of higher authority . 
7.29 Compilation  of Accounts  and Funds  Certification  
The following points should be borne in mind –  
I) After the budget  for a year is sanctioned  by the Parliament , separate 
allotment s are made by the Railway  Board  for works  chargeable  to 
Capital , Capital Fund , Development  Fund, Depreciation  Reser ve Fund, 
RRSK  etc. as classified  vide allocation  rules  as detailed in Chapter VII of 
Indian  Railway Financial  Code  Vol. I.  
II) System  of Allotments  
a) These allotments are made in lump  sums and their distribution  over 
the works  individually costing  over Rs. 250 lakhs and those below Rs.  
250 lakhs is set out in the Work , Machinery  and Rolling  Stock  
Programmes (Pink Book ) which are furnished to the railways along 
with the budget  order sanctioning the allotments.  
b) A list of approved  works  costing  below Rs. 250 lakhs  for which item 
wise provision is not made in the Pink B ook is also furnished to the 
concerned railway  to ensure that no expenditure  is incurred by the 
Railway  Administration  on any new  work  not provided in the 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
201 
For internal use of IA&AD  sanctioned  budget  for the year or carried forward from the sanctioned  
budget of the previous year (cf Item 38 of Annexure II of Indian  
Railway Financial  Code  Vol.I ). 
c) As regards works  costing  above Rs.250 lakhs each for which 
expenditure  can be incurred during the year to the extent indicated in 
the Pink Book , it should be seen that –  
i. No appropriation  is made to any work  not provided in the Pink 
Book  without the prior appr oval of the Railway  Board  except 
works  which are considered to be urgently necessary to safeguard  
life or property  or to repair damage  to the line  caused by flood, 
accident  or other unforeseen contingency , so as to restore or 
maintain through communication  (Para 1103 – E) or  
ii.  When the work  in question was included in the previous year’s 
budget  but no provision made in the sanctioned  budget of the y ear 
because it was expected to be completed in the previous year.  
d) In regard to works  costing  below Rs. 250 lakhs , it should be seen that 
suitable record is kept in the executive  and Accounts  Offices to watch 
that the total appropriation  against them does not exceed the 
allotment.  
e) Statements showing the transfer of funds from one work  to another 
received periodically in the Accounts  Office  should be checked by 
Audit  to see that such transfers are in order and have been sanctioned  
by competent  authorities . 
7.30 Utilisation of Un -anticipated Credits  
During Audit , the following points need to be checked: –  
In cases where substantial un -anticipated credits  are utilised to incur fresh items 
of expenditure  which could not otherwise have been incurred, it should be seen 
that –  
I) Detailed  review is made to ascertain that the expenditure  was definitely 
not anticipated in the budget  and  
II) That such expenditure  could be met by savings in expenditure  provided 
for in the budget  without serious detriment to safety  of efficiency  of 
operations  (cf Paras  383 - 384 of Indian  Financial  Code  Vol.I ) 
III) That prior sanction of competent  authority  is obtained for utilisation such 
unanticipated  credits . 
IV) A list of such credits  is submitted by the Railway  Administrations along 
with their Revised  Estimates . 
V) Any substantial credits  utilised by the Railw ay Administrations, which 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
202 
For internal use of IA&AD  have not received the required sanction of the Government  of India  should 
be held under objection and commented upon.  
7.31 New  Services  not contemplated in the Budget  
The following points should be borne in mind – 
I) New  Works  estimated to cost  more than Rs.50 lakhs each are treated as 
“New Service /New instrument  of Servi ce’. 
II) If the new  work  cost between Rs.50 lakhs and uptoRs.2.5 Crore, the 
expenditure  can be incurred by re -appropriation  from saving within a 
grant , under report t o Parliament . 
III) If the new  work  cost more than Rs.2.5 Crore, prior approval  of Parliament  
is required.  
IV) The term  ‘New  Service ’ is referri ng to expenditure  arising out of a new  
policy  decision, not brought to the notice of Parliament  earlier, including 
a new  activity or a new  form of investment . 
V) Likewise, relatively large expenditure  arising out of important expansion 
of an existing activity is treated as ‘New  Instrument of Service ’, which is 
a slight  variant of the term ‘N ew Service ’ (Para  369 and 370 – F1) 
VI) It is the responsibility of the Railway  Board  to ensure that the total 
expenditure  against a grant  voted by the Parliament  or appropriation  
sanctioned  by the President  does not exceed the amount of the grant 
(including supplementary grants) or of the appropriations  (Including 
supplementary appropriations).  
VII) If a proposed work  does not find place in the budget  estimates  for the year, 
it should be examined to see whether it is a case of “New  Service  not 
contemplated in the budget” requiring the specific approval  of the 
Parliament  before expenditure  is incurred.  
VIII) Queries  may be put to Administration , but a definite objection should not 
be raised on this score without previous consultation with DAI . 
7.32 Expenditure  Late In the Finan cial Year  
During Audit , it should be seen that –  
Individual instances where expenditure  has been sanctioned  late in the financial  
year and where the expe nditure  does not seem to have been a matter of urgent 
necessity, but where due deliberation does not appear to have been exercised in 
order to keep down the cost  (eg. Failure  to seek the cheapest source of s upply ) 
may be investigated.  
7.33 Expenditure  on Undertaking Outside the Normal Scope of Railway  Working  
The results of working of special  schemes on which railways have a financial  
interest , such as running  of Road  Transport  services, departmental  catering 
schemes, family  welfare  schemes etc. should be zealously wa tched and 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
203 
For internal use of IA&AD  considered for comment in the Audit  Report , if necessary.  The scope  of audit  of 
such expenditure  is generally indicated in the audited  copy of the order s 
communicating the sanction to such schemes.  
7.34 Tests to Judge Productivity  of Capital  Expenditure  (Post  Project  Appraisal ) 
The following points should be  borne in mind –  
I) It is important that an investment  proposal is subjected to proper financial  
appraisal  not only before it is sanctioned  but also a certain period of time  
after the project has been in operation .  
II) A ‘Productivity  test’ should be conducted in respect of all major  works  to 
determine as to whether the financial  return antici pated from a project at 
the estimate  stage is actually realised in due course or not.  
III) The figures relating to sanction, actual, further outlay  etc. should be 
verified.  
IV) When the examination of productivity  tests conducted by Railway  
Administrations, reveals any important or peculiar features  or when there 
is any doubt or difference of opinion  in regard to the interpretation of 
Railway Board ’s orders or in regard to information that should be 
supplied, the same should be taken up  
7.35 Imprest  Stores  Accounts  
These come under the following categories:  
I) Engineering . 
II) Other than En gineering . 
III) Plant  Reserve . 
Audit  should be conducted with reference to the rules  in Chapters XVIII and XIX 
of Indian  Railway  Code  of Stores  Department . 
7.36 Law  Charges  
Law charges  are the charg es paid as fee to the Advocates , Arbitrators, Govt . 
pleaders etc. The record maintained by the Accounts  Office  to show the total 
charges  incurred for each case s hould be consulted in this connection.  
During Audit  it should be seen: -  
I) The fees and other charges  claimed by Government  pleaders, advocates 
etc. are in accordance with the scales fixed  if any , by the Administration . 
II) The financial  power  of the officer sanctioning such charges , in a particular 
case, has not been exceeded.   
7.37 Manpower  Management  
Its Audit  may be conducted in accordance with Para 7.2 of chapter of 
‘Audit of General  Administration and Vigilance Department ’. 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
204 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.38 Audit  of World Bank  Aided  Projects  
The Government  of India  arranges loan through International banking sectors for 
financing development  projects  to be implemented by t he departments  of the 
Central  Government, States, Public  Sector  Undertakings  and Autonomous  
Bodies , etc. 
The following points should be borne in mind –  
I) The Main legal  Agreement  signed by the borrower and the Bank  sets out 
the terms and conditions of the Loan  including specific covenants for 
Accounts  and Audit . 
II) The CAG  of India  is the independent  auditor for issue  of Audit  
certificates, certifying that the expenditure  shown in the Statement of 
Expenditure  (SoE) is correct and utilized for the purpose of project  
III) Audit  Certificate  on annual  Project  Financial  Statements is issued on the 
basis of Local  Audit and Central  Audit  
The following are to be ensured before issuing Audit  Certificate   
a) Whether the implementing agencies carried out expenditure  as per 
pattern/c onditions/ requirements spelt out in the Project  Appraisal  
Document: Loan  Agreement  becomes the core document.  
b) Cases of presumptive fraud , if any  
c) No wasteful expenditure . 
d) Eligibility of contractors  selected for execution  
e) Existence of efficient internal  controls and risk  management  systems.  
f) Project  disburseme nt is made in accordance with the project 
document.  
g) Project  disbursements  are validly supported by adequate 
documentation .  
h) Project  financial  reports  are fairly and accurately presented.  
i) Project  monitoring  and evaluation  are undertaken and reports  are 
prepared as required.  
7.39 Public  Private  Partnership  Projects   
(The Public  Auditing  Guidelines  on Public Private  Partnerships (PPP ) in 
Infrastructure  Projects  (Public Auditing Guidelines ) may be referred to while 
auditing  PPP projects . These Guidelines are comprehensive and cover various 
aspects of PPP contracts  and management , as they are conceptualized and 
developed in India ) 
Areas where private  participation can be done:  
I) Indian  railway  is suffering from low investments, poor capacity, 
congestion , low speeds, and poor conditions of railway  stations  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
205 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) The budgetary  resources  are not sufficient to make up for the investments 
required.  
III) PPP approach can be used to transform the railway  in different areas 
comprising from ticketing, station construction  and upkeep , rolli ng stock  
manufacturing, signalling  etc. 
IV) Bibek  Debroy  committee  has also said that PPP  mode can be utilized for 
mobilizing finances.  
Benefits  
I) Opens opportuni ty for returns  from investment  in Rail  Projects .   
II) Augmentation of railway  infrastructure  and decongestion of the railways.  
III) Ensure timely availability o f Rail  Infrastructure  to the beneficiaries viz. 
Port, Industry and States.  
IV) Better maintenance  and efficiency  in implementation  of projects . 
V) In improving quality  of services.  
Following are the different Models of PPP  projects  in Indian  Railways  
I) Non-Government  Railway  Model ,  
a)  This model shall be applicable to 1st and last mile connectivity 
projects  at either end of the rail  transportation chain  providing 
connectivity to ports, mines, logistics p arks or large - sized cluster of 
industries, which are handling goods  traffic  for multiple consignors or 
consignees.  
b)  These will be operated by railways on “common carrier” principle for 
public  transportation of goods  and passenger . 
c)  In this model land  acquisition , development , construction , 
maintenance  everything will be done by priv ate player.  
d)  Operations  and revenue collection will be done by Indian  Railways . 
e)  Freight  revenue will be collected by Indian  Railway  and apportioned  
to the Non -Government  Railway as per Inter Railway Finance  
Adjustment  
f)  As the project line  is on private  land and the assets  are fully private  
infrastructure , it will be transferred to IR  in case of violations of 
specified terms of agreement at terms set out in the Agreement  or by 
mutual  consent at such terms as may be mutually agreed.  
II) Joint  Venture  Model  
a)  In this model, a Special  Purpose Vehicle  (SPV) is created which 
carries all the w ork starting from project finalization to operations  and 
maintenance . The Operations  & Maintenance  can be done by Indian  
Railway . 
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
206 
For internal use of IA&AD  b)  This model is to be used for commercially feasible and bankable 
projects . 
c)  Revenue  realization for SPV will be through apportionment  of freight  
charges . 
III) Build  Operate  and Transfer  Model ,  
a)  This model shall be applicable to the sanctioned  Railway  projects  
where it is not possible to identify a stakeholder or strategic  investor 
who can take a lead in making investment  in the project line .  
b) The projects  under this model will generally be long rail  corridors  
carrying traffic  generated from various streams.   
c) These will be sandwiched sanctioned  new line and gauge  conversion  
projects  or dedicated freigh t corridors . 
d) In the absence of strategic  investor, selection of investors will be done 
through competitive bidding  process.  
e) The Net revenue payable to the concessionaire shall be fix ed at 50% 
of the gross apportioned  revenue.  
IV) Capacity augmentation with funding provided by customers  model   
a)  For doubling/multiple line  projects  where some customers  are 
beneficiaries of the capacity addition and may be interested in funding 
the project for expeditious completion /commissioning . 
b)  Construction , operations  and maintenance  will be done by Railways . 
c)  Railways  will pay  fixed  percentage  of the amount invested through 
freight  rebate on freight  volumes every year, for particular period or 
till the funds provided by the project beneficiary is recovered, 
whichever is earlier.  
V) Capacity augmentation through annuity model.  
a)  This model is applicable to sanctioned  doubli ng, 3rd line  and 4th line 
projects  where it may not be possible to find funding from any specific 
user.  
b)  The concession would be for financing and construction . 
c)  The concessionaire would be paid thro ugh annuity for limited 
predetermined period.  
d)  Annuity will be determined through competitive bidding    
e)  Annuity payments will be budgeted and paid on a committed basis  
The following are the Possible Risks in developing PPP  Projects  (cf. Para 4.4 of 
Public  Auditing  Guidelines  2009 on PPP in Infrastruc ture Projects ) 
I) Lack  of clarity about partnership objectives  
II) Inadequate definition of business model of the partnership  
III) Risks associated with negotiating an appropriate  partnership  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
207 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Risks to the Railway ’s interest  as a minority shareholder  
V) Risks associated with monitoring  of the Railway ’s interest  in the 
partnerships  
VI) Railway ’s exposure  in the event of difficulties  
The following are the objectives  in conducting PPP  Audit  (cf. Para 3.2 of Public  
Auditing  Guidelines  2009 on PPP in Infrastructure  Projects ) –  
I) To provide unbiased, objective  assessment  of whether publ ic resources  
are responsible and effectively managed to achieve the intended results  
II) Help the organizations  achieve accountability and integrity, improve 
operations  and instil confid ence among citizens and stakeholders  
III) Supports the governance responsibilities of oversight, insight and 
foresight  
IV) Oversight  addresses whether Government  entities are doing what they are 
supposed to do and serves to dete ct and deter public  corruption  
V) Insight assists decision makers by providing an independent  assessment  
of government programmes, policies, operations  and results  
VI) Foresight identifies t rends and emerging challenges  
During the Audit  of PPP  Projects , the following should be seen (cf. Para  5.2, 
5.3 of Public  Auditing  Guidelines  2009  on PPP in Infrastructure  Projects) –  
I) Internal  controls exist which provide a reasonable confidence that public  
resources  are protected and institutional objectives  are met.  
II) The concept of PPP  is the arrangement between two different conflicting 
partners. Since the Public  sector partners’ objective  is to provide goods  
and services to the public  at a reasonable cost  as against the motive of the 
business partners to maximise profits , a strategic  plan of setting  of the 
objectives  and the possible alternatives to balance  conflicting priorities of 
the partners is in place.  
III) In case advisers are appointed for framing responsibilities and objectives  
of the partners , it is done after adequate scrutiny and evaluation  as to the 
compensation  paid to them is linked to their performance . 
IV) The conditions of the PPP  arrangement protect the interest  of both the 
parties, to prove that the arrangement is a fusion of the diverging talents 
and skills in -spite of conflicting objectives  of the partners.  
V) The performance  of the PPP  arrangement is justified qualitatively (output  
of service ) and financially.  
VI) Check  and evaluate the systems and procedures together with the 
management  of performance  indicators.  
VII) The publi c interest  is protected and the return on investment  is sustainable 
and adequate.  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
208 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) The PPP  arrangement meets the common objective  of the partners to 
improve the value for money  invested and combining the capabilities of 
both the parties.  
List of items to be seen during inspection  
Principal  Chief  Engineer’s office (Engineering  Branch) (Apex  Unit):  
I) Engin eering  surveys  project report.  
II) Investment  planning  and works budget and appropriation  accounts.  
III) Land  Acquisition Register . 
IV) Railway  Board  Circulars , Guidelines, correspondences.  
V) Schedule  of maintenance as per guidelines and manuals.  
VI) Preparation of estimates and sanctions  accorded.  
VII) Policy regarding tenders , security deposits etc.  
VIII) Contract Agreements and tenders and work orders.  
IX) Sale account of Tender forms.  
X) Schedule  of rates.  
XI) Schedule  of Power.  
XII) General  review of contractor bills  with reference to contract 
agreements and work orders . 
XIII) Completion  Report.  
XIV)  Monitoring  control over expenditure . 
XV) Continuance of work establishments after physical  completion of 
works.  
XVI)  Proposal for Track  Renewal  work.  
XVII)  Review of prematurely condemnation of Track  Machines  along with 
Idling of Track Machines.  
XVIII)  Released Materials  Account.  
XIX)  Handing over report by Construction Organisation for creation of 
Assets.  
XX) Maintenance  of Ballast  profile.  
XXI)  Review of cases of refund of Earnest Money and Security  Deposits  
along with pay orders.  
XXII)  Additional  items of works o r enhancement of rates beside sanctioned 
work order.  
XXIII)  Lease agreement on way leave and land  management . 
XXIV)  Encroachment cases.  
XXV)  Earnings  on Railway  Land  and fulfilling of target.  
XXVI)  Outstanding license fee against private  parties.  
XXVII)  Planning set for Maintenance /Rehabilitation of Bridges  & Tunnels 
and target achieved thereof.  
XXVIII)  Bridge Inspection  Register . 
XXIX)  Reports of Commissioner  of Railway  Safety . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
209 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXX)  Matters sub -judice and maintained in PCE’s office.  
XXXI)  Monthly  and periodical  reports (MCDO  & PCDO ). 
XXXII)  Previous inspection reports issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
XXXIII)  Previous Inspection  Reports of Competent Authority.  
Open  line organisation  
A. Senior  Divisio nal engineer’s office (Engineering  Branch ) 
I) Attendance  Register  and Casual  Leave  Registers.  
II)  Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
III) General  review of contractor bills  with reference to contract  
agreements and work  orders.  
IV) Schedule  of rates.  
V) Additional  items of work  or enhancement of rates.  
VI) Work  started without calling for tenders . 
VII) Splitting up of work  orders to avoid calling for tenders . 
VIII) Ballast  train journals , challans and ballast train movements.  
IX) Review of posting of works  register  and their maintenance  in 
accordance with Code  rules . 
X) Review of the procedure for preparation of completion  reports . 
XI) Delay in preparation of completion  reports . 
XII) Temporary  sanctions  for Gangman et c. and need for engagement  for 
temporary staff . 
XIII) Recoveries  of taxes , municipal  taxes , rent  and water  charges  theref ore. 
XIV)  Misc . cash  collections and remittances of the same to the Treasurer  
and registers  in connection therewith.  
XV) Indent for stores  and disposal  of cases of missin g stores . 
XVI)  Commencement of work  before issue  of work  order or sanction of 
relevant estimates . 
XVII)  Sale of grass  Trees etc.  
XVIII)  Recovery  of freight  charges  at public  rates. in the case of deposit  
works . 
XIX)  Review of important cases.  
XX) Review of freight  bills. 
XXI)  Engineering  stores , suspense  returns , scrutiny of stores  account  in 
respect of the monthly  returns  received from the SSE/ Works  and 
SSE/P.W ay and review of the Progress  in their disposal  including 
review of material -at-site accounts . 
XXII)  Correction of the adjustments  of the transactions appe aring in the 
returns  sent to Accounts  without undue  delay.  
XXIII)  Cases of theft  and losses.  
XXIV)  Scrutiny  of system  of delegation of powers to see that there has been 
no abu se of powers.  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
210 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXV)  Auction  sales . 
XXVI)  Booking  cost of materials  issue  to the Contractors appearing in the 
returns  sent to Account  without undu e delay.  
XXVII)  Stationery Registers.  
XXVIII)  Estimates  and completion  Reports . 
XXIX)  Register  of measurement  books  (closed and current  and bla nk).  
XXX)  Review of major  works  (including track  renewals).  
XXXI)  Collection  and remittance  of GST  on contractor’s bills . 
XXXII)  Collection  and remi ttance  of Building and other construction  workers  
welfare  cess.  
XXXIII)  Lease  of Railway  buildings /land  lent to outsiders and Gover nment  
departments  and recoveries  of taxes , municipal  taxes , rent -and water  
charges  therewith.  
XXXIV)  Misc . cash  collections and remittances of the same to the Treasurer  
and registers  in connection therewith.  
XXXV)  Assisted  and private  sidings  agreements.  
XXXVI)  Land  Registers.   
XXXVII)  Review of registers  of level crossings  over-head  and underneath both 
for private  parties and Government  departments . 
XXXVIII)  Review of re gister  of bridges . 
XXXIX)  Review of position of newly built quarters . 
XL) Review of list of completion  drawings . 
XLI) Scrutiny  of deposit  works . 
B. Assistant  Divisional  Engineer 's Office  
I) Agreement  regarding purchase  of materials . 
II) Credit  Note Books . 
III) Rent  Rolls.  
IV) Land  lease register  and agreements.  
V) Register  of allotment of quarters . 
VI) C.R. Notes  and cash  receipt  books  and stock  books  thereof.  
VII) Payments from station earnings . 
VIII) Review of Important cases.  
IX) Railway  material  consignment note books . 
X) Work  Orders.  
XI) Contractor's  bills. 
XII) Measurement  books  (including standard Measurement books ).  
XIII) Register  of measurement  books . 
XIV)  Muster  Rolls of temporary and permanent  labour  employed on the 
sub-divisions .  
XV) Register  of sanctions  of temporary labour . 
XVI)  Identification  registers  of temporary labour . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
211 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVII)  Register  of top initials of muster  sheets . 
XVIII)  Material  train statement e.g. ballast and guards  journals . 
XIX)  Material  at site accounts . 
XX) Recovery  of materials  supplied to contractors . 
XXI)  Clothing  and uniform  account . 
XXII)  Check  of passes  and P.T.Os . 
XXIII)  Check  of tools  and plant.  
XXIV)  Stamp  and Stationery Account . 
XXV)  Casual  leaves and attendance . 
XXVI)  Salary  bills and T.A. Bills . 
XXVII)  Leave  Accounts . 
XXVIII)  Service  records (Annual  verification  of service  of Pensionable staff ). 
XXIX)  Verification  of pay  as shown in Labour  Pay Sheets with service  
records.  
XXX)  Card  passes  and their movement.  
XXXI)  Cash  Imprest , if any.  
XXXII)  Work  started if any, without preparation of estimates  or calling for 
tenders . 
XXXIII)  Review of log books , if any.  
XXXIV)  Handing  over notes . 
XXXV)  Review of last inspection  reports  both by Audit  and Accounts . 
XXXVI)  Adjustment  Memo.  
XXXVII)  Register  of Advice  Notes . 
XXXVIII)  Departmental  verification  of sto res. 
XXXIX)  Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes.  
XL) Progress  reports  of works . 
XLI) Implementation of Minimum wages  Act and Labour  Act etc.  
C. Senior  Section  Engineer /P.Way (SSE /P.Way)  
I) Attendance  Register  and Casual  Leave  Registers of subordinate  staff. 
II) Leave  accounts  of erstwhile Group  'D' staff . 
III) Fixation  of pay  of staff  whose service  records are kept in these of fices.  
IV) Passes  and P.T.Os . and wagon  passes  including stock  of blank books  
and recording of issues in personal accounts  of staff  and issue  of these 
to contractors . 
V) Register  of card passes  and provision passes  (including their 
movements).  
VI) Monthly  returns  of  
a) Building and P.M.W. M aterials  chargeable  to Engineering  Stores  
Suspense  
b)  Imprest  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
212 
For internal use of IA&AD  c)  Surplus  and  
d)  Material  at site accounts . 
VII) Stores  ledgers  including tracing of issue  notes  and advice notes . 
VIII) Clothing  and uniform  registers . 
IX) Tracing of posting  of issue  notes  of stores  into ledgers . 
X) Scrutiny  of contracts  and agreements and delay in the execution  of 
agreements.  
XI) Sale of grass  and trees on Railway  land: 
XII) Working of USFD  
XIII) Register  of stationery.  
XIV)  Register  of Tools  and Plant . 
XV) Empties  rolls and their accoun ts. 
XVI)  Accountal  of scrap  materials . 
XVII)  Muster  rolls and salary bills . 
XVIII)  Misc . Cash  collections.  
XIX)  Review of previous inspe ction  reports  of Audit  and Accounts . 
XX) Review of important files . 
XXI)  Stamp  register . 
XXII)  C & P Ledgers . 
XXIII)  Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes.  
XXIV)  sIdentification  registers  of temporary labour . 
XXV)  Review of handing over notes  of SSE/P.Way)  
XXVI)  Credit  Notes  book. 
XXVII)  R.M.C . Notes . 
XXVIII)  P. Way books . 
XXIX)  Service  records including annual  verification  of service  of 
pensionable staff . 
XXX)  Check  of Gate  Passes . 
XXXI)  T.L.As.  
XXXII)  Review of Thefts  and Losses cases.  
XXXIII)  Review of progress of special  works . 
XXXIV)  Scrutiny  of stock  sheets . 
XXXV)  Scrutiny  of staff  strength  and justification  thereof.  
XXXVI)  Ballast train journals.  
D. SENIOR SECTION ENGINEER/WORKS (SSE /WORKS)  
I) Service  Books , Leave  accounts , attendance  registers  and casual  leave  
register  of subordinate  staff including erstwhile Group  'D' sta ff. 
II) Passes  and P.T.Os . and wagon  passes  including stock  of blank books  
and recording of issue  of personal accounts  of staff  and issue  of these 
to contractors . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
213 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Register  of card passes  and provision passes  (including their 
movements).  
IV) Monthly  returns  of: 
a)  Building and P.W. Materials  chargeable  to Engineering  Stock  
Suspense . 
b) Imprest . 
c)  Surplus  and 
d) Material  at si te accounts  and account  of consumable  stores  into 
ledgers . 
V) Clothing , uniform  Register . 
VI) Stores  Ledgers and tr acing of posting of issue  notes  of Stores into 
ledgers . 
VII) Review of T.A. Journals  of staff   
VIII) Scrutiny  of contracts  and agreements and delay in the execution ~ of 
agreements.  
IX) Scrutiny  of measurement  books  (including standard Measurement  
Books ). 
X) Scrutiny  of work  orders  and bills . 
XI) Recovery  of rent  from staff  and register  of Railway  buildings . 
XII) Recovery  of rent  for buildings  let to outsiders and Government  
Departments  and recovery of rent from lease of railway  land, grass  
and sale of trees on railway  land. 
XIII) Regi ster of tools  and Plant , stationery and service  stamps.  
XIV)  Admissibility or otherwise of amenities  provided to Railway  staff 
particularly in Railway c olonies . 
XV) Adequacy of the hire charges  recovery from contractors  for supply  of 
goods , steam road rollers and cranes etc. by the railway . 
XVI)  Empties  and their accountal.  
XVII)  Muster  rolls and salary bills . 
XVIII)  Misc . cash  collections.  
XIX)  Accountal  of scrap  materials . 
XX) Review of important ca ses. 
XXI)  Works  started, if any, without calling for tenders  or sanction of 
estimates . 
XXII)  Review of Log  books  including petrol account . 
XXIII)  Identification  registers  of temporary labour . 
XXIV)  Review of handing over notes  of SSE /Works  
XXV)  Issue  notes  and Advice  Notes . 
XXVI)  Review of last inspecti on reports  issued by Audit  and Accounts . 
XXVII)  C & P Ledgers . 
XXVIII)  Credit  Notes  Book.  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
214 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIX)  R.M.C . Notes . 
XXX)  Material  accounts  Note Books . 
XXXI)  Review of sanctions  of temporary labour . 
XXXII)  Review of materials  supplied to contractors . 
XXXIII)  Materials  repaired in SSE /Works  shop  
XXXIV)  Gate  passes . 
XXXV)  T.L.As.  
XXXVI)  Review of theft  and losses \cases.  
XXXVII)  Comparison  of dates, in measurement  books  with T.A. Journals . 
XXXVIII)  Register  of annual  repairs  to Railway  Buildings , particularly in 
Railway colonies  for white washing  programme  petty  repairs , 
frequency  in replacement  of fittings  such as wash basins, commodes 
etc. 
XXXIX)  Register  for occupation of rest  house  by railway  and other officials.  
Construction  Organisation  
A. Chief Administrative Officer ( CAO ) or Chief  Engineer / 
Construction  (Apex  Unit ) 
I) Land  acquisition  Register  
II) Contracts  and tenders  and work  orders  
III) Sale account  of tender  forms ,  
IV) Estimates  and completion  Reports  
V) Schedule  of rates.  
VI) Policy  regarding tenders , security  deposits etc.  
VII) Dead  Stock  
VIII) Attendance  register  
IX) Casual  leave  register  
X) Charge  Reports  
XI) Check  of T.A. Bills   
XII) Appointment  of substitutes  
XIII) Check  of pension settlement cases  
XIV)  Issue  of passes , P.T.Os . and card passes  
XV) Narrative  Reports . 
XVI)  Scrutiny  of the physical  progress of the individual works  in relation 
to the up -to-date expenditure . 
XVII)  Review of Works  started on Urgency Certificates.  
XVIII)  Handing  over Notes  of SSEs , AENs  and Dy.  CEs.  
XIX)  Works  started without calling for tenders  
XX) Splitting up of work  orders to avoid calling for tenders . 
XXI)  Commencement of work  before issue  of work  orders or sanction to 
relevant estimates . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
215 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXII)  Credit  Note Books . 
XXIII)  Engineering  Stores , suspense  Returns viz. Imprest  Account -Surplus  
account , M.A.S. Account.  
XXIV)  Cases of thefts  and losses  
XXV)  Salary  Bills  
XXVI)  Misc . Bills  and Pay  Orders  
XXVII)  Review of arbitration  cases  
XXVIII)  Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit  
XXIX)  Indents  for stores  and disposal  of cases of missing  stores  
XXX)  Register  of advice notes  and Advice  Note books  
XXXI)  Account  of petty  and consumable  stores  
XXXII)  Tools  and Plant  register  
XXXIII)  Departmental  verification  reports  of stores  
B. Dy. Chief  Engine er/Construction  including AENs  and SSEs  
(Executing Entities ) 
I) Land  acquisition  Register  
II) Imprest  account  
III) Contractors’ bills  and works  registers  
IV) Bills  for Stores  transactions  
V) Contracts  and tenders  and work  orders  
VI) Sale account  of tender  forms  
VII) Estimates  and completion  Reports  
VIII) Schedule  of rates  
IX) Dead  Stock  
X) Monthly  returns  regarding progress of works  
XI) Stationery and stamp accounts  
XII) Miscellaneous  cash receipts  
XIII) Attendance  register  
XIV)  Casual  leave register  
XV) Handing  over Notes  of SSEs , A.ENs and Dy.  CEs.  
XVI)  Check  of T.A. Bills  
XVII)  Appointment  of substitutes  
XVIII)  Check  of pension settlement cases  
XIX)  SRs and Leave  accounts  of staff  due to retire during the next three 
years  
XX) Issue  of passes , P.T.Os  and card passes  
XXI)  Issue  Notes  and Advice  Notes  
XXII)  Narrative  Reports  
XXIII)  Scrutiny  of the physical  progress of the individual works  in relation  
to the up -to-date expenditure  
XXIV)  Review of Log  Books  of vehicles  
Chapter 6 – Audit of Civil Engineering Department  
 
216 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXV)  Review of Works  started on Urgency Certificates  
XXVI)  Works  started without calling for tenders  
XXVII)  Splitting up of work  orders to avoid calling for tenders  
XXVIII)  Recoveries  of Hire  charges  of Tools  and Plants  hired out to 
contractors  
XXIX)  Commencement o f work  before issue  of work  orders or sanction to 
relevant estimates  
XXX)  Credit  Note Books  
XXXI)  Engineering  Stores , suspense  Returns viz. Imprest  Account -Surplus  
account ,    M.A.S. Account  
XXXII)  Review of cases of thefts  and losses  
XXXIII)  Salary  Bills  
XXXIV)  Adjustment  Memo  
XXXV)  Departmental  verification  of stores  
XXXVI)  Stores  Ledgers , including tracing of Issue  Notes  
XXXVII)  Misc . Bills  and Pay Orders  
XXXVIII)  Review of arbitration  cases  
XXXIX)  Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit  
XL) Review of postings of works  registers  and their maintenance  in 
accordance with the code rules  
XLI) Indents  for stores  and disposal  of cases of missing  stores  
XLII)  Register  of advice notes  and Advice  Note books  
XLIII)  Account  of petty  and consumable  stores  
XLIV)  Tools  and Plant  register  
XLV)  Departmental  verification  of stores  
XLVI)  Issue  notes  and their posting in the respective ledgers  
XLVII)  Measurement  books  including Standard  Measurement Books . 
XLVIII)  Collection  and remittance  of GST  on contractor’s bills . 
XLIX)  Collection  and remittance  of Building and other construction  workers  
welfare  cess.  
L) Implementation of Minimum wages  Act and Labour  Act etc.  
LI) Scrutiny  of deposit  works  
 
Note :   In addition to the coverage of the issues mentioned above during 
Compliance  audit , the  manual  provisions contained in various auditing  
guidelines /guidance  notes  such as, Performance  Audit  Guidelines , Financial  
Attest  Auditing  Guidelines , CAG ’s Rules  and Regulations - 2020 , PPP Auditing 
Guidelines  etc may also be complied with, according to the mode of Audit being 
undertaken. Compliance of CAG’s Auditing Standards , 2017 is  mandatory and 
failure  to observe the audit standards  will render the auditor answerable f or such 
failure . 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
217 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
218 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 7  - WORKS AUDIT    
Civil , Mechanical , Electrical  and Signalling  & Tele communication  
Engineering  Departments  of Indian  Railway  are responsible for construction  
and acquisition  of new  assets  and their maintenance  including maintenance  of 
existing fixed  assets  such as Building, Bridges , Roads, rolling stock  etc. To 
execute these activities, Railways  engage various agencies through works  
contracts . This chapter has been devised for audit  of activities pertaining to 
works  contract . 
These Engineering  Departments  carry out various activities from initial stage 
to the completing of works  in respect of new  as well as existing assets  as detailed 
below : 
1. PREPARATION AND APPROV AL OF DRAWINGS AND 
ESTIMATES  
I) Abstract  Estimate : Abstract estimate  is prepared with brief report and 
justification  to get administrative approval  to be accorded by the 
competent  authority  for the work  or scheme.  
II) Detailed  Estimate : This estimate  is prepared after obtaining 
administ rative approval  for the project showing complete details of 
estimated cost  with financial  justification  and allocation  mainly to get 
technical  sancti on of the competent  authority . 
III) Construction  Estimate: This estimate  is the detailed estimate for 
undertaking execution  of New  Line Projects , GC and Doubling  of lines 
etc. by Construction Organisation . 
IV) Revised  Estimate : This estimate  is prepared when the expenditure  
exceeded/likely to be exceeded the sanctioned  estimated cost  projected 
vide the Detailed  Estimate . 
V) Completion  Estimate: This estimate  is prep ared after the completion  of 
particular Project /Work  incorporating complete details of the expenditure  
incurred on the Project/Work together with the difference between the 
sanctioned  and actual cost  for getting final sanction of the competent  
authority .  
The Audit  of various Estimates  may be done along with the Audit of Tenders  and 
Contracts , contractor’s bills  and completion  reports . 
During audit  of Estimates , following should be seen :  
I) That the estimates  are p repared in conformity with the various 
specifications  and drawings  relating to the particular Project /work . 
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
219 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) That appropriate  Sanction  of the competent  authority  has been obtained.  
III) That necessary justification  for the expenditure  proposed to be incurred is 
available.  
IV) That the estimate  contains source of Funds  and details of allocation  and 
expenditure  has been appropriately classified  and allocated to the correct 
heads of account . 
V) That the cost  is worked out judic iously with reference to available Uni fied 
Standard  Schedule  of Rate  (USSOR) and market trends.  
VI) That the nature, scope  and objective  of the work  are clearly describ ed in 
definite terms.  
VII) That the estimate  contains sufficient credits  for released material  
(CRRM).  
VIII) That in respect of works  started on urgency certificate , the time  schedule  
for submission of various estimates  and approval  thereon together with 
execution  of works  is strictly complied with.  
IX) That the estimate  has be en prepared keeping in view the payment of 
Minimum Wages Act, EPF  Act, ESI  Act etc.  
X) That in the estimate  for hiring of contract  labour , the number of laboure rs 
estimated are justified and supported with detailed justification  and no 
departmental  personnel available to carry out the activities included in the 
contract . 
XI) That the estimate  is prepared after ascertaining the rate  of returns . 
XII) That the financial  justification  as well as justification  regarding nature, 
object and scope  of work is available.  
XIII) That the estimate  is prepared in a realistic manner observing the standards  
of financial  propriety  and without inflating the cost  unduly.  
XIV)  That the estimate  should not contain provision for any item that is not 
legitimately chargeable  to Railway  funds or a charge of an unusual  nature 
requiring special  sanction.  
XV) That Revised  Estimate , if any, is prepared and submitted for the sanction 
of competent  authority  immediately on exploring the likelihood of 
incurring expenditure  in excess to the sanctioned  detailed estimate  
XVI)  That n o expenditure  in excess to the already sanctioned  detailed estimate  
is incurred before the sanction of revised  estimate  
XVII)  That t he item of work  included in the revised estimate  was not foreseen 
at the detailed estimate stage itself.  
XVIII)  That t he alteration of the cost  of work  in the revised estimate  has not 
affected the financial  justification  and sanctioning authority  of the 
original estimate  
XIX)  No portion of expenditure , already incurred on the basis of detailed 
estimate , becomes infructuous due to revision  in the plan or method of 
execution . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
220 
For internal use of IA&AD  2. REVIEW OF TENDERS  
Following are the types of tenders :  
I) Open  Tenders  – by public  advertisement  
II) Limited  Tenders  – by direct  invitation to a limited number of 
firms/contractors  
III) Single  Tenders  – Single tender can be awa rded to a particular firm under 
following situations such as - 
a) Emergent Situation  
i. Accidents , breaches  involving dislocation of traffic ; 
ii. For works  of specialised nature; and  
iii. Any other situation s. 
b) Annual  maintenance  contract  for equipment  placed on OEM  (Original 
Equipment Manufacturer)  
During the Audit , it should be seen that:  
I) Proper  arrangements exist for giving due publicity for tenders  invited and 
the response is quite good.  
II) When the response for tenders  is poor, the reasons therefore should be 
examined critically.  
III) The tenders  contain suf ficient details and information relevant to the 
work . 
IV) The Tenders  are invited after fulfilling all the pre -requisites such as 
readiness of clear site, plans , design , detailed drawings  and schedule  of 
quantities (Chapter II, Para  4 of Railway  Board ’s Compendium on 
Tenders and Contract  2016 ). 
V) The Tenders  are invited with sufficient tender  notice period (as prescribed  
by Railway  Board  from time  to time ) facilitating the bidders participating 
in more numbers to obtain competitive rates.  
VI) The tenders  are called for with the specifications  and drawings  as per 
provisions in t he sanctioned  estimate . 
VII) The floating of tenders  is approved  by the competent  authority  as per the 
estimated cost . 
VIII) The extension of opening  of tenders , if any, is justified on record and the 
reasons for the same to be checked.  
IX) Normally delayed tenders  are not accepted.  If accepted, the reasons there 
for are recorded and justified.  
X) Whether specific approval  of Railway  Board  is obtained before calling of 
tenders  involving foreign  exchange  in excess of the prescribed  amount.  
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
221 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) The tender s are opened at the prescribed  date, time  and place by the 
officers nominated for this purpose in the presence of Accounts  
representative and the intending tender ers. 
XII) The tend ers are submitted along with the prescribed  Earnest Money  
Deposit  (EMD ) in the form as notified by the Railway  board.  
XIII) The tenders  without E MD are not entertained and summarily rejected . 
(Para  620 - F) 
XIV)  The offers obtained are tabulated and authen ticated by an appropriate  
authority  and scrutinised by the Accounts  Officer.  
XV) The offers are discussed in the Tender  Committee  (TC) constituted by the 
authori ty competent  to accept the tenders . 
XVI)  When the GM  is the authority  competent  to accept the tender , the 
concerned HOD should arrange to constitut e the TC .(Para  614 - F) 
XVII)  There is no ambiguity in the schedule  of items or conditions of the 
contract . 
XVIII)  The lowest tender  should be accepted.  If other than lowest accepted, the 
reasons for ignoring lowest bidder  have been recorded and discussed in 
the TC . 
XIX)  Before accepting the tendered rates, their reasona bleness and 
competitiveness are established ; 
XX) The credentials of the bidders are as per latest General  Conditions of 
contracts  (GCC -2022 ). 
XXI)  Neither any post  tendering  correspondence has been made with the 
contractor nor any document  other than provided with tende r document, 
has been considered.  
XXII)  Conditional tenders  are not accepted.  
XXIII)  A Notarised  affidavit on a non -judicial stamp paper has been submitted 
by the tenderer stating that all the statements and the documents  are true 
and factual.  In its absence his offer has been rejected . (Para  3.2 of 
Railway  board letter no. 2017/trans/ 01/policy  dated 8 -02-2018)  
XXIV)  There is no undue  delay in finalisation of tenders  and communication  of 
its acceptance to the tenderer.  
XXV)  The contractor  has registered itself with the state Labour  Board  and the 
certificate  of registration  has been submitted.  
XXVI)  No important changes are made in the form of standard contract  
documents  or new  types of contract  documents  used.  
XXVII)  The tenders  are not deliberately or inadvertently split up so as to evade 
the necessity of obtaining the sanction of higher  authority  to the award  of 
the contract . 
XXVIII)  The tenders  are in conformity with the estimates  keeping in view the 
various specifications , drawings  etc. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
222 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIX)  The conditions for supply  of railway  material  required to be used by the 
contractor are explicitly stated in the contract . 
XXX)  The particulars regarding quantity and rates are pres cribed  and the prices 
stipulated are firm and the rates are as per schedule  of rates.  
XXXI)  Where the rates are higher than schedule  of rates market trend of 
percentage  increase should be as certained wherever possible.  
XXXII)  The cases of acceptance of rates below schedule  of rates should be 
investigated.  
XXXIII)  The Price Variation  clause (PVC ) is accepted for the contract  having 
value more th an Rs. five crore (para 8 of Railway  board letter no. 
2017/trans/ 01/policy  dated 8 -02-2018 ). 
XXXIV)  The officer r ecommending acceptance of the tender  in his capacity as a 
member of the TC  is not also the accepting authority  for the same 
tender .(para 616 –F) 
XXXV)  In case of sub sectioning/ splitting of a particular work  with a view to 
expedite the same, if the same firm offers L -1 rates in respect of all the 
subsections then evaluation  of eligibility of the firm for award  of all the 
works  should be done for the work  as a whole (ATN of Railway  board 
vide letter no. 2018/CE -1/CTE /AP/2 dated 17 -04-2018 taken on the  audit  
para no. 2.3 for the year 2013 -14 of CAG  report no 13 of 2016).  
XXXVI)  The tender  has been finalised by the tender  committee  or accepted directly 
by concerned executive  in SAG/JAG or SS level holding independent  
charge, as per directives issued by Railway  Board  from time  to time . 
(Latest directives issued vide Railway Board ’s letter No. 2017/CE -I /CT/9 
dt.11.09.2017)  
3. ADV ANCES TO CONTRACTS  
I) Mobilisation  advance  
This shal l be limited to 10% of the contract value and payable in two 
stages as indicated below - 
 Stage 1 - 5% of the contract  value on signing of the contract agreement.  
Stage 2 - 5% on mobilisation of site establishment, setting up of offices 
and actual commencement of the work . 
II) Advances  against Machinery  and equipment  
a) Not exceeding 10% of contract  value.  
b) Not exceeding 75% of the purchase  price of th e equipment . 
c) Hypothecation  of Machinery  to President  of India  by a suitable bond 
or irrevocable Bank  Guarantee  (BG) for the full cost  of the plant and 
equipment  is required.  
 
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
223 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Advances  for accelerating progress of the work  
a) Decided on merits of each case by the GM . 
b) Restricted to 5% of the contract  value . 
c) Granted by the GM  on the recommendation of the PCE /CE in 
consultation with associate finance.  
IV) Advances  in exceptional cases  
a) Decided on merits of each case by the GM . 
b) Restricted upto a maximum of Rs. 20 L akh. 
c) Granted by the GM  on the recommendation of the PCE /CE in 
consultation with associate finance.  
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) Proper  sanction of competent  authority  is obtained.  
II) The conditions for granting advances  are satisfied.  
III) Sufficient security  arrangements against loss  to the railway  are ensured 
while granting advances . 
IV) The pro -rata recovery of principal  together with the interest  at the rates 
prescribed  by the Railway  Board  from time  to time  is ensured.  
(cf. Para 1264 -E) 
4. REVIEW OF ON ACCOUNT BILLS, FINAL BILLS  AND 
COMPLETED CONTRACTS  
Generally following types of contracts  are awarded by Engineering  
Department : 
I) Zonal  Works  Contracts  for ordinary repairs , maintenance  and other petty  
works in a particular Zone.  
II) Special  Works  Contracts  for maintenance  of Railway  Assets . 
III) Special  works  contracts  for Construction  of Bridges , Quarters , formation 
of embankments etc.  
IV) Contracts  for Supply  of building  materials , other stores  etc. 
The audit  of contracts  should cover an examination of  
I) the system  of entering into contracts , 
II) form of the contracts  and  
III) the specific conditions a nd rates etc. on which the work  is to be done or 
the supplies are to be made.  
During the Audit , the following points should be seen :  
I) The successful tenderer submitted the Performance  Guarantee  (PG) 
@ 5% of the contract  value within 21 days from the date of issue  of 
Letter of Acceptance  (LOA ). 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
224 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) The PG  is submitted by the successful bidder  before signing of the 
contract  agreement or 21 days of issue  of LOA , whichever is earlier.  
III) Penalty @12% p.a. is collected for the delay in submission of PG  from 
22nd day up to 60th day from the date of issue  of LOA . 
IV) If contractor failed to submit PG  within 60 days of issue  of LOA , 
whether action  for termination of the contract  duly forfeiting the EMD  
and other dues, has been taken . 
V) The Contract  is signed by the authority  who is competent  to enter into 
contracts  and simultaneously signed by the contractor or his 
authorised agent . 
VI) The penalties  provided in the contract  (levy  of Liquidity Damages  
(LD) etc.) are not waived where the railway  has suffered definitely 
ascertainable loss  / inconvenience due to failure  of the contractor to 
complete the work  or supply  the material  within the stipulated time , 
without recording adequate grounds for waiver.  
VII) The contrac ts with provisions of price variation clause should be 
reviewed to see that the PVC  payments are worked out according to 
the given formula.  
VIII) The extension of currency  of contract  has been grant ed correctly on 
Railway  Account  (17-A of GCC ) and the reas ons quoted by contractor 
are covered  under 17 -A of GCC.  
IX) If extension is granted under Clause  17-B of GCC , whether  LD as per 
General  Condition of Contract  (GCC) - April -2022)  has been levied.  
X) The cases of extension of currency  of the contract  due to reasons not 
on railway  account  are to be reviewed to see whether Price Variation  
is allowed for the extended period also.  
XI) There is no omission  of any important clause e.g. inspection  of stores , 
date and place of delivery, despatch instructions , name of consignee , 
etc. 
XII) The security  deposit  @ 5% of the contract  value is deposited by the 
successful tenderer in the appropriate  form approved  by the Railway  
Board . 
XIII) In case the Security  Deposit  (SD) is allowed to be recovered from the 
running  bills of the contractors , the same may be ensured up to the SD 
is fully recovered.  
XIV)  In case of execution  of the contract  in excess of the original contract  
value, SD  for the difference in value is recovered.  
XV) In case of quantity executed for the value beyond 125% of the 
agreement value, the PG  is recoverable  for the difference between the 
original contract  value and the value actually executed.  
XVI)  The validity of the PG  is 60 days beyond the currency  of the contract , 
original as well as extended (Railway  board letter no.2007/CE -
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
225 
For internal use of IA&AD  I/CT/18 Pt. XII dated 31 -12-2010 ). Also see, whether PG has been got 
extended at the time  of grant  of extension of DOC.  
XVII)  In case the contract  is terminated or resci nded under the provisions of 
the GCC , the PG  is forfeited in full and is at the absolute disposal  of 
the President  of India . (Para  g (iii) of Annexure -A to Railway  board 
letter no.2007/CE -I/CT/18 Pt. XII dated 31 -12-2010 ) 
XVIII)  The decision to terminate the contract  and execution  of the balance  
work  is not taken by an officer lower than the authority  who signed 
the contract .(Para  1270 – E) 
XIX)  All statutory  deductions like Building and Other Construction  
Workers Welfare  Cess, Royalty, etc. have been made from 
contractor’ s bills . 
XX) The contractor has submitted proper invoice as per GST  Act., after 
levy of GST at proper rate . 
XXI)  The contractor has submitted GST  registration  certifica te. If he is not 
liable to be registered under GST Act , whether the GST under Reverse  
Charge  Mechanism (RCM), has been deducted from his bills . 
XXII)  Before releasing payment, the Railw ay Administration  has obtained 
the documents  for implementation  of minimum wages  Act and EPF  
Act and ESI  Act. 
XXIII)  PG has been released only after physical  completion  of the work . 
XXIV)  SD has been released after obtaining no claim certificate  from the 
contractor and a certificate  given by at least JAG level officer to the 
effect that work  has been completed and no dues are pending  against 
the contract . 
XXV)  If any recovery against any contractor has been pointed out by Audit  
or Vigilance  or internal  check, whether the completion  of contract  has 
been finalised and SD  released after making such recovery.  
XXVI)  Whether a certificate  has been submitted by the contractor, for having 
uploaded the correct details of contract  labours engaged in connection 
with the contract  and payments made to them during the wage period 
on Railway ’s Shramik k alyan portal , before passing any bills  or 
releasing advances /PG /SD etc. ( RB letter no. 2018/CE -I/CT/4 
dt.17.10.18 ) 
XXVII)  The rates allowed for small works , for which no agreements but only 
work  orders are issued, are not in excess of the schedule  of rates f or 
the particular division.  On Railways  where copies of work  orders are 
not received in the Accounts  Office , the check should be applied 
during local  inspections . 
XXVIII)  In lump  sum contracts , to be subjected to such checks  as are 
practicable, a provision is made explicitly for reductions in the event 
of any item of work  being omitted or replaced by less costly  designs .  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
226 
For internal use of IA&AD  The form employed is of a type that has been sanctioned  by higher 
authority  and accepted on legal  advice  
XXIX)  After termination of the defaulting  contract , whether the contract  for 
left over quantities/items has subsequently been awarded, duly 
forfeiting the BG/PG  of the defaulting  contractor.  
A record should be kept of the contracts  reviewed, number of cases in which 
tenders  other than the lowest have been accepted and the number of cases in 
which audit  has questioned the exercise of discretion by the officers accepting the 
tenders . 
5. AUDIT OF  MEASUREMENT BOOK  
The measurement  book  is a very important original record to be maintained at 
filed level for taking measurement  of the work  executed by a particular contractor 
for making payment therefor. It is a reliable original record that can be produced 
as evidence in a Court  of Law .   
During its Audit , it should be seen that:  
I) The pages in the book are machine  numbere d and no page is torn out on 
any account  nor is any entry be erased or  defaced so as to be illegible.  
II) The corrections, if any, made in the book are initialled by the custodian.  
III) The entries are made directly at the site of the work  and not copied into it 
from loose sheets . 
IV) The measurements have been recorded only by the authority  competent  
to measure the work , as per latest directives.  
V) The method of taking measuremen ts may, where possible, be examined 
to see whether it is capable of giving accurate results.  
a) A contract  may stipulate payment for ballast or earth at so much per 
100 cubic feet, while the actual measurement  may be by tr ucks.  
b) In such cases the carrying capacity of the truck as given in the Goods  
Tariff  should be compared with that taken by the engineer and the 
conditions of loading  e.g. “flush with the top”, etc., considered.   
VI) The prescribed  amount of check measurement  has been exercised by 
higher executive  officers should be verified.  
VII) Frequent corrections in the quantities in measurement  book , although 
duly initialled, should be scrutinised to see if they appear to be bonafide.  
VIII) No measurement  is recorded on the date earlier than that recorded on 
previous pages.  
IX) The location of work  done is accur ately shown in MB so as to enable any 
agency  to exercise proper test check of location.  
X) No measurement  recorded for the quantity of work  more than that 
sanctioned  as on date of recording th e measurement . 
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
227 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Net quantity has been worked out after making deduction of shrinkage 
allowance wherever applicable such as earth work , ballast work , road 
work  etc. 
XII) The items of supply  entered on MB are duly accounted for in the ledgers . 
XIII) The recording of leading of material  should be cross checked from the 
ledgers , where such material  has been accounted for.  
XIV)  If payment fo r dismantling of structures  has been made, whether the 
material  realised from dismantling has been accounted for in the ledgers . 
XV) Whether proper MBs register  has been maintained in the ADE N’s office 
as well as in the Engineering  Branch . 
XVI)  It should be seen that all recoveries  due under the contract  or by usage or 
custom from a contractor are made, not only tho se on account  of material  
acknowledged by him but also for instance in regard to departmental  
labour  engaged on works  for which the contractor was liable, the cost  of 
scaffolding, the cost  of clearance of site, etc.  
XVII)  In the case of P. Way renewals, it may be seen whether the number of old 
rails and sleepers taken out is approximately equal to the number of new  
ones put in.  
XVIII)  Whether a pro per account  is maintained of the released material  and 
action  taken for their disposal  in the prescribed  manner or otherwise to 
the best advantage of the Railway . 
6. MATERIAL MODIFICATION  
As per Para  1110 -E, following can be considered as Material  Modification : 
I) Any change in the alignment of the sanctioned  work  
II) Introduction of any new  items considerably changing the original scope  
of work  
III) Any departure from the standard of construction  
IV) Introduction or omission of any work  or facility  
V) Any modification  of sub work  involving considerable outlay  
VI) Introduction of any new  station or omission of any station  
Duri ng the Audit , it should be seen as to whether :  
Sanction  has been obtained, if there is considerable difference –  
I) Between revised and original estimate ; 
II) Between payment made for the quantities executed by th e contractor and 
those provided in the estimate ; 
III) Between expenditure  booked as per the work  register  and the latest 
sanctioned  provisions; and  
IV) Instances of undertaking M aterial  Modification  without the prior approval  
of the authority  who sanctioned  the original estimate .  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
228 
For internal use of IA&AD  7. CONTRACTORS ’ LEDGER  
(CF 1483 -E) 
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) Contract  ledger  containing separate folio for each contractor is being 
maintained.  
II) The account  of each contractor exhibiting all transactions with him 
relating to one or several works  executed by the contractor is maintained.  
III) The gross amounts passed for payment in respect of a particular contract  
are c orrectly posted in the contractors ’ ledger . 
IV) All amounts due from a particular contractor have been recovered.   
V) Systematic reconciliation  between the contractors ’ ledger  and the works  
register  is made.  
VI) The accounts  are closed and balanced monthly  under the initials of the 
Gazetted  Officer.  
VII) The accounts  should not be kep t open for a long time  since the date of the 
last entry in the ledger  account .  
VIII) The reasons for inordinate delay if any, in the receipt  of subsequent bills  
in the accounts  office should be looked into and, if important, followed 
up. 
8. COMPLETION REPORTS / COMPLETION ESTIMATES/ 
COMPLETION STATEMENTS  
(see Para  1701 -1714 -E) 
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) The scrutiny of completion  reports  should generally be on the same lines 
as for the original estimates ; 
II) The relevant estimates  and contracts  should also be reviewed 
simultaneously;  
III) Completion  reports  for works  which show appreciable variations in 
expenditure  should be compared with estimates  specially with a view to 
see whether, there is any slackening of effort in regard to the efficiency  
and accuracy  in the preparation of estimates ; 
IV) The total expenditure  on the works  as shown in the completion  report 
should be compared with that booked in the Works  Register  to see whether 
there is any material  modification  requiring the sanction of the higher 
authorities ; 
V) The allocation  of expenditure  as between Capital , Capital Fund , DF, DRF , 
RRSK  etc. in respect of mixed works  has been correctly made;  
VI) Where the works  are partly debitable to the Railway  and partly to other 
Railways /Govt . Depa rtments /private  parties, proper shares are adjusted 
before the accounts  of the works  are closed;  
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
229 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) In the case of works  which are financially justified at the time  they were 
sanctioned , whether the justification  still holds good despite an increase 
in the total expenditure  in completing the work ; 
VIII) All material  charged to the work  or works  but not used up are returned to 
stores  or transferred elsewhere and the accounts  of the work  credited  with 
their value and the credit  for rele ased material  provided for in the estimate  
has been adjusted against the work  concerned;  
IX) The completion  report has been prepared in the prescribed  form and 
sanctioned  by competent  authority ; 
X) Objections to expenditure  such as excess over estimates  are not left un -
regularised for unduly long periods with the intention of regularising them 
through completion  estimates ; 
XI) There is no undue  delay in preparation and disposal  of completion  reports  
after completion of works ; 
XII) Important differences between the sanctioned  amounts and actual 
expenditure  have been suitably explained;  
XIII) The completion  reports  have been noted in the Register  of Work s and 
verified by the Accounts  Office  concerned; and  
XIV)  When the work  is for the use of an outside body such as the construction  
of assisted sidings , interest  and maintenance  charges  are recovered not 
from the date of sanction to the completion  report but from the date the 
work  was physically completed and brought into use.  
9. WORKS RE GISTERS  AND REVENUE ALLOCATION 
REGISTERS . 
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) The postings of audited  bills should be traced into the works  and 
allocation  registers . 
II) When subsidiary  registers  and records are maintained, e.g. actual 
expenditure  on worked lines, the postings of the documents  in the 
subsidiary  registers  or records should also be checked.  
III) The reconciliation  of Works  Registers with the General  Books  should be 
reviewed in order to see that early action  is taken to trace and clear all 
discrepancies.  It is desirable that a detailed scrutiny should be made of 
the registers  of one division or abstract each month  so as t o complete the 
entire field in a year.  The actual process of reconciliati on may be tested 
occasionally by  Audit . 
IV) All works  registers  should be reviewed as prescribed .   
V) The expenditure  should be compared with the sanctioned  estimate  and 
excesses traced into the objectionable  items register . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
230 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) The expenditure  incurred without estima te should also be included in the 
objectionable  items register .  
VII) Associate account  should have a control  to ensure that large numbers of 
works  are not tak en up for execution  before sanction of estimate  including 
works  taken up on urgency certificate . 
VIII) Expenditure  incurred in the absence of regular sanction to a work  not 
provided for in the detailed budget  of the year should be scrutinised to see 
whether it involves a new  service  not contemplated in the budget.  
In the review of works  registers  it should also be seen that –  
I) Adequate control  is exercised by the Railway  Administration  over the 
closure of the accounts  and preparation of completion  reports of works . 
II) There are no cases of abnormal delays in closing accounts  of works  after 
physical  completion  of a work .   
III) All cases in which there has been undue  delay in the submission of 
completion  reports  should be examined and the delays in adjustment of 
released material  and other points contributing to the delay in closing the 
accounts  of works , which would seem to be avoidable, should be taken 
up with Administration . 
Also, refer to Para  9.2.3  of Chapter -2 (Audit  of Accounts  Department ) 
10. ARBITRATION  AWARDS  
The following points may be seen as to whether:  
I) The standard conditions of the contract  lay down the procedure for 
settlement of disputes by ar bitration  under Indian  Arbitration  Act 1940 
and the rules  made there under (Para  629 – F1) 
II) All arbitration  awards are executed on stamp paper in accordance with the 
Stamp  Duty  Act. 
III) The demand of a contractor for a reference to arbitration  after receiving 
all the payments relating to the works  executed by him and furnishing a 
“No claim certificate ” is not justifiable and hence to be rejected  by the 
Railway  Administrat ion after taking legal  opinion  (Para 1274 – E) 
IV) Delay in arranging Payment of arbitration  award  is avoided so as to avoid 
unnecessary payment of interest  charges . 
V) In cases of amount to be realised from the contractor due to arbitration  
award , the Railway  Administration  is required to take decision on merits 
on each case bearing in mind the provision of the Limitations Act  1963 in 
regard to finalisation of the award . 
VI) TDS  has been deducted as per extant  rules . 
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
231 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) Provisions laid  down for monitoring  of arbitration  cases by  Railway  
Board  through letter No. 2016/CE -1/CT/ARB/3 NITI Ayog Pt. dated 
01.05.2017  are followed scrupulously.  
VIII) Action has been taken by Railway  to switch over the on going  arbitration  
cases to the amended Arbitration  Act as per Railway Board ’s letter No. 
2016/CE -1/CT/ARB/3 NITI Ayog Pt. dated 08.11.2016  and 31.01.2017  
and to open Escrow accounts  in cases where the stay orders of court  were 
obtained for payment of awards.  
11. PAY ORDER AND OTHER VOUCHERS NOT FALLING 
UNDER ANY DEFINITE CATEGORY (MISC. VOUCHERS)  
In audit ing of payment vouchers , it should generally be seen that: - 
I) The voucher  is in a prescribed  form, no particulars or signatures  required 
by the form applicable to the cas es of charge have been omitted;  
II) In scrutinising the miscellaneous  vouchers , the rules  or authority  for 
arranging the payment should be looked into in each case;  
III) The propriety  of the expenditure  may also to be examined;  
IV) Each voucher  is original;  
V) It is for a current  and specific claim and the period to which the payment 
relates and the allocation  of th e charge are clearly shown upon the 
voucher ; 
VI) It is signed by the officer or officers responsible for the accuracy  and the 
propriety  of the expenditure  in all necessary places.  Signatur e by stamp 
or in pencil should not be accepted;  
VII) It is properly filled up and headed;  
VIII) It bears an order of the responsible officer to pay  a specified sum and a 
note whether the payment is to be or has been made by cash  or by cheque;  
IX) The nature of the charge is such as may rightly be made against 
Government  and for the work  or service  to which it is debited ; 
X) The rates paid are not much higher than those usually paid in th e locality 
for a similar services;  
XI) The outlay  is fully detailed and quantities are always given of work  done 
and of material  supplied;  
XII) The details work  up to the totals and all arithmetical  calculations are 
correct;  
XIII) The total of each bill as well as of the amount paid is expressed in words 
as well as in figures;  
XIV)  No erasure or alteration of figures is made in the voucher .  When 
corrections are necessary, they shoul d be made in red ink , leaving the 
original legible after being crossed out and initialled by a responsible 
official;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
232 
For internal use of IA&AD  XV) Corrections in the total or in the amount paid are attested by both the 
payee and the drawer of the bill;  
XVI)  Each voucher  is cancelled in some efficient way and receipt  stamps are 
defaced so as to tender  them unusable;  
XVII)  Defacement  of bills  and supporting documents : The supporting 
document s of bill should be defaced by showing the particulars of the bills  
on which the charges  due have actually been passed to prevent them from 
being passed a second time  for payment.  
12. AUDIT OF JOURNA L VOUCHERS  
(CF. Para  307 & 308 -A1) 
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) Particular attention should be paid to c redits  to expenditure  heads.  
II) The charges  debitable to one head  of account  are not debited  to the other.  
III) All adjustments  of large amounts be tween Capital  and Revenue  as well as 
write back  of expenditure  to Revenue when carried out should be 
scrutinised with reference to the original vouchers  themselves and the 
reasons for the first wrong allocation  ascertained.  
IV) Cases which may reveal a financial  irregularity  should be brought up.  
V) A careful watch should be kept against fictitious  adjustments  specially at 
the end of the year, such as the following:  
a) Outlay on stores  charged off to unsanctioned work  and regularised in 
the accounts  of the following year.  
b) Amounts debitable a gainst revenue being adjusted against Capital  and 
vice versa , the entries being reversed in the accounts  of the following 
year.  
c) Adjustments on account  of work  done or stores  issued from Capital  to 
Revenue , or vice versa , held in abeyance.  
d) Expenditure  incurred on one work  being sometimes charged to 
another work  to avoid excess over estimate  or objectionable  
expenditure  for want of estimates . 
e) In particular, the rush of expenditure  in the concluding month  of the 
year, should receive special  attention.  
(Examination  of vouchers - 3.10 to 3.12 of Financial  Attest  Auditing  Guidelines  
for audit  of State  Government  Auditing Guidelines may also be referred to)  
13. OBJECTIONABLE  ITEMS REGISTER  
Please refe r to para no. 9.2.4 of Chapter  3 on Audit of Accounts Department . 
14. AUDIT OF WORKS PROGRAMME  
Please refer to para no. 7.1 of chapte r 6 on Audit of Civil Engineering Department   
   Chapter 7  – Works Audit  
 
233 
For internal use of IA&AD  15. AUDIT OF SANCTIONS OF WORK  
Refer to para no 7.2 of chapter 6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  Department ). 
(Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines -4.8- Audit of sanctions ) 
I) Verify whether the sanction is within the general or express powers 
delegated to the sanctioning authority . 
II) Verify whether the criteria  for sanction such as - availability  of funds, 
determination of physical  targets , objects of expenditure  and accounting 
procedure - have been adhered to.  
III) Verify whether the sanction is not split to avoid obtaining sanction of a 
higher autho rity. 
IV) Verify whether sanction is conflicting with general principles  of public  
sector financial  management  or other orders /instructions ) 
16. AUDI T OF WORLD BANK AIDED PROJECTS  
Please refer to para no 7.38  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  Department ). 
17. AUDIT OF PUBLIC PRIV ATE PARTNERSH IP PROJECTS  
Please refer to  para no. 7.39  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
(The Public  Auditing  Guidelines  on Public Private  Partnerships (PPP ) in 
Infrastructure  Projects  (Public Auditing Guidelines) may be referred to while 
auditing  PPP projects . These Guidelines are comprehensive and cover various 
aspects of PPP contracts  and management , as they are con ceptualized and 
developed in India ). 
Note :   In addition to the coverage of the issues mentioned above during Compliance  audit , the manual  
provisions contained in various auditing  guidelines /guidance  notes  such as, Performance  Audit  Guidelines , 
Financial  Attest  Auditing  Guidelines , CAG ’s Rules  and Regulations - 2020 , PPP Auditing Guidelines  etc 
may also be complied with, according to the mode of Audit being undertaken. Compliance of CAG’s 
Auditing Standards , 2017 is  mandatory and failure  to observe the audit standards  will render the auditor 
answerable for such failure . 
  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
234 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
235 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 8  - AUDIT OF COMMERCIAL DEPARTMENT  
1. ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
The Commercial  Department  of the Railway  is the most visible department and 
is usually called the earning and marketing  department.  
*The Commercial  department is responsible for the following activities and 
functions : 
I) Selling Railway  services  
II) Creating, designing and devel oping traffic  
III) Securing and maintaining friendly relations with its customers  
(passengers  and traders offering goods  traffic ) 
IV) Cultivating  and maintaining good public  relations with its customers  and 
public  at large  
V) Fixing of rates, fares  and other charges  
VI) Collection , accountal and remittance  of charges  and other traffic  receipts  
VII) The overall commercial  activities, which are also called as railway  
business, are of two types – Freight  and Coaching . Coaching business is 
further divided into Passenger  and Parcel  Business . 
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF COMMERCIAL 
DEPARTMENT  
ORGANISATION  CHART AT RAILWAY BOARD  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Minister of Railways  
Minister of  State of  Railways  
Chairman, Railway Board & Chief 
ExecutiveOfficer (CEO) - CRB 
 Member Operations & Business  
Development (O&BD) -M/O&B D 
 
Additional 
Member/Traffic 
Transportation  Pr. Executive 
Director 
/Coaching  AM/ 
Tourism & 
Catering  AM/  
Commerci
al AM/Marketing 
& Business 
Development  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
236 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.1 At Railway  Board  Level  
Member  (Operations  & Business  Development  (O&BD ) Rail way Board - 
M/O&BD is in -charge of Commercial  as well as Operating  Department at 
Board’s Level. There is an Additional  Member to look after the Traffic  
Transportation who is assisted by Principal  Executive  Director  (PED )/Traffic 
Transportation (Marketing )-TT(M). PED/Coaching will look after the Coaching 
Directorate which will include Coaching Rates , Time Table, Train operations, 
Punctuality of trains, Reservations etc. Further Additional Member (Tourism  and 
Catering ) will be dealing with IRCTC . Additional Member/Comme rcial will be 
looking after the Commercial Activities, Station Amenities  etc. AM/Marketing 
and Business Development  will also be looking after the Information  Technology 
i.e. dealing with C RIS and other for Passenger Business, viz. PRS , UTS , I-
Ticketing , E-Ticketing , booking through SMS , Enquiry  etc.   
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 3.4 to 3.6 may be read for determination of 
Apex  Unit, Audit Units  and Implementing  Units. Chapter -I of Regulation of 
Audit and Account  (Amendments ) 2020 -2(12) -Definitions)  
2.2 At Zonal  Level  
Along with the General  Manager  of each Zone, there is one Additional  General 
Manager  who looks  after the Commercial  Department  in matters delegated to him 
by the General Manager. Principal  Chief  Commercial Manager (PCCM ) is 
usually the functional head  of Commercial department at zonal level. He directly 
reports  to the General Manager.  
The PCCM  deals with all general matters in commercial  including rates, catering, 
refunds , claims and public  complaints  and grievances . He is assisted by CCM 
(PS), CCM (PM ), CCM (FS) , CCM (FM) , CCM(Systems ) and CCO  (Chief  
Claims  Officer). These officers are further assisted by Dy.  CCMs  and Senior  and 
Assistant  Commercial  Managers , and in spectorial staff . 
The General  branch of Commercial  Department  looks after matters such as 
wharfage  and demurrage , handling contracts , passenger  amenities  at stations , 
ticket checking, passenger  complaints , commercial  publicity, commercial  
establishment, identifyi ng and supply  of tickets , accounts  and audit  objections, 
commercial  stores , etc. The Rates  Branch  deals with implementation  of rating  
policies enunciated by the Board , issue  of various rate  circulars , time -tables to all 
stations of the railways, siding agreements, quoting of s pecial  rates for passengers  
as well as freight  traffic , opening/closing of stations, categorisation of stations, 
justification  for introduction of new  trains, refund  of overcharges , etc. The 
catering branch looks after all the aspects relating to departmental  & railway 
managed catering contracts and also  IRCTC  managed catering establish ments, 
viz. Food Plazas, Pantry Cars, etc.  in respect of Catering  in the zone.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
237 
For internal use of IA&AD  The Claims  organization  under CCO  has two wings, viz. - Claims settlement wing 
and Claims prev ention wing. CCO is assisted by a Dy.  CCO  and a Dy.  CCM (CP)  
respectively in these two branches. The Dy.  CCO has Senior  Commercial  Officer 
(Claims) and a number of assistant  officers whose number varies according to the 
work -load on each railway . There is also a legal  cell to render legal  advice in 
settlement of claims as well as for processing claim cases taken by the Claimants 
to Railway  Claims Tribunals (RCTs) and other Courts /Forums/Tribunal . 
The main function of the Commercial  branch is to sell the services and market 
the Railways  in Coaching  as well as in Freight  business, providing Passenger  
Amenities , viz., Waiting /Retiring  rooms, Drinking water , High  level Platform, 
Foot Over  Bridge , Toilets , Urinal  facilities, etc. Its functions  include efforts to 
promote and retain traffic  of high  profit  yielding commodities  with railways by 
maintaining constant liaison  with customers , trade and industries, and to offer 
various Freight incentive  schemes and other business promoting measures  
launched from time  to time . This branch also looks after the movement of parcel  
traffic  at important junctions and by important trains  on d ay-to-day basis and 
takes remedial  actions in case of held ups. It also undertakes  development  
measures  such as opening of out -agencies, city booking  agencies, etc., a s also 
leasing  of SLRs /VPUs  besides contracts  and PPPs  activities, etc.  
The Chief  Public  Relations  Officer is another officer (ex -cadre ), who assists the 
Commercial  department. He looks after the matters such as organizing proper 
publicity about railways, issuing press notes , giving advertisements  to 
newspapers , conducting press parties at various important junctions, organizing 
press conferences, etc., on special  occasions. He is assisted by a Senior  Public 
Relations Officer. They are further assisted by APROs . There is also post  of 
PRO/APRO in all divisions  and important state capitals falling in a zone, where 
he works  under both Sr. DCM  and CPRO . Normally, CPRO reports  directly to 
Additional  General  Manager  & General Manager  of a zone.  
2.3 At Divisional  Level  
Divisional  Railway  Manager  (DRM ) is the head  of the division. The DRM is 
assisted by one or more Additional  Divisional Railway Managers  (ADRMs ) and 
several branch officers. The head  of Commer cial Branch  is Sr. Divisional 
Commercial Manager  (Sr.DCM ) in JA Grade  or Divisional Commercial Manager 
(DCM) in senior scale depending on size of the division . He is assisted by one or 
more DCMs & Assistant  Commercial Managers (ACMs) respectively. The 
primary function of these officers is to implement all policies and directions 
issued by the head  office and to ensure smooth day -to-day commercial  working 
at the stations  on a division. The Sr. DCM/DCM is responsible for all executive  
functions  of commercial  branch.  
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
238 
For internal use of IA&AD  Commercial  Staff  of Division  
In addition to these officers, Area Officers are posted in certain specific locations 
in each division, depending upon size and importance of the area being looked 
after. They are also delegated certain p owers to handle day -to-day commercial  
matters such as waiver of wharfage  and demurrage , releasing reservation  quotas, 
public  relations, etc., in addition to some opera ting functions  on certain divisions . 
2.4 At Station  Level Including Goods  Sheds  and Sidings  
Station  is the main centre where the commercial  business is actually transacted. 
They can be called the retail outlets for selling of various Railway  
products/services. There are around 8000 stations  spread all over Indian  
Railways . The nature of traffic  handled at each station differs and these stations 
are listed alphabetically in the Alphabetical list of Railway Stations published by 
IRCA  (Indian Railway Conference Association ), New  Delhi . Some important and 
larger stations are headed by Station Managers  (SMs ) or Station Superintendents 
(SSs).  
At smaller stations  (also known as wayside stations),  quantum of traffic  dealt with 
is not very heavy. Therefore, at these stations, both the operating and commercial  
working is handled by the SM assisted by Assistant  Station  Masters (ASMs ) in 
shift duties. At bigger stations, depending on the work -load, separate commercial  
staff is provided to look after the commercial  work . They are generally known b y 
a generic name of Commercial  Clerks  and may be working as Booking  Clerks, 
Parcel  Clerks, Goods  Clerks, Ticket Collectors , Inquiry  & Reservat ion Clerks, 
Catering  Managers , etc. At still bigger stations, there are all these categories of 
commercial  staff headed by supervisory staff  such as Chief  Reservation 
Supervisor , Catering Inspector , Chief Parcel Supervisor, Chief Booking 
Supervisor, Chief Goods Supervisor, etc. depending on their functions . 
Being the hub  of comm ercial  activity stations  are provided with various facilities 
to handle the traffic  dealt with at the Station . These facilities may include an 
adequate number of booking  windows for passengers , a separate parcel  office 
with separate facilities for booking , delivery and stocking  of parcels , a separate 
goods  office with covered  shed, platforms  for loading /unloading , special  sidings  
for dealing with oil traffic  and other bulk traffic  such as  coal, timber, minerals, 
etc. 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMERCIAL 
DEPARTMENT  
The Commercial  Department  of the Railway  is the most visible department, and 
is usually called the earning and marketing  department, the others being spending 
departments . This is because the railway  revenues are entirely made up of the 
earnings  from sale of tickets  and transportation of goods , luggage  and parcels  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
239 
For internal use of IA&AD  which are booked and delivered by the Commercial Department. This department 
has to collect the charges  as per rates in force and account  for them. It also 
canvasses for traffic  to see that the vast railway  facilities are utilized to the 
maximum  extent for the purpose for which they have been created.  
The main functions  of the Commercial  Department  may, however, be enumerated 
as below:  
3.1 At Railway  Board  level u nder  Traffic  (Commercial ) Directora te 
Policies of the Commercial  Department are formulated at apex level (Railway  
Board ) by the Railway Board  Directorates. There are five Railway Board 
Directorates associated with the Co mmercial Department viz. Traffic  
Commercial, Coaching, Tourism  & Caterings, Non -Fare Revenue  & 
Computerisation and Information  Systems . Detailed activities have been 
provid ed in the Railway Board websites viz. 
http://indianrailways.gov.in/railwayboard/view_section.jsp?lang=0&id=0,1,388  
Important Activities under  Railway  Board  Directorates: -  
I) Fixation  of passenger fare  structure, Refund  Rules , Passenger Amenities ; 
II) Framed Freight  Rate Circulars , Rates  Master Circulars & Commercial  
Circular  
III)  Rates  for postal and military traffic ; 
IV)  Rail-road co-ordination & opening of flag  stations ; 
V)  Handling of goods and good -shed facilities;  
VI)  Catering  &vending  arrangements on railways;  
VII)  Claims  for compensation  arising out of rail accidents ; 
VIII)  Public  grievances;  
IX)  Computerisation of Commercial  activities viz. PRS , UTS , Parcel, FOIS, 
Refund  & Data Warehousing for PRS etc.  
X)  Introduction of new trai ns  
XI)  Calling for Public  investment  
XII) Framing Parcel fare  structure and leasing  of Parcel Space  
XIII)  Correct collection, accountal, remittance  & apportionment  of traffic  
receipts etc.  
Also there exists INDIAN RILWAY CONFERENCE ASSOCIATION (IRCA -
established  in 1903), which is an Administrative  Organisation  of all Zonal  
Railways  and is responsible for framing rules  and fixes the responsibility for such 
rules . Similarly, it also frames rules  for international  traffic . 
Functions  
I) To make pooled wagons  for working in broad  gauge  and meter gauge  
II) To make tariff  rules  for transportation of goods , parcel , luggage  and 
passenger  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
240 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) To publish railway  rule books  and distribute them to various zonal 
railways.  
Further, to inspect the railway  rolling stock  at the transship ment  points,  one 
commercial  committee  functions  under IRCA . The CCM of all zonal railways are 
members of this committee . The functions of this commi ttee are as under:  
I) To discuss regarding suggestions on classification  and reclassification of 
various types of goods ; 
II) To suggest and recommend changes about packing conditions;  
III) To suggest and recommend  changes about rates for carriage of different 
types of goods . 
3.2 At Zonal  Level  
I) To sanction and notify sidings  including PFTs.  
II) Provision  of booking  facilities  for traffic , i.e. opening of booking  offices, 
goods  sheds , parcel  offices, etc.;  
III) Opening of enquiry and reservation  offices for passenger  traffic ; 
IV) Implementation of the rating  policy  of the railway  board i.e., giving effect 
to changes in the fares  and freight  rates from time  to time ; 
V) Quotation o f special  rates;  
VI) Provision  of users' amenities ; 
VII) Naming of stations  and change of station names, etc.;  
VIII) Introduction of new  trains  
IX) Work relating to opening and operation of sidi ngs including issue of rate 
circulars etc.  
3.3 At Divisional /Field Level  
I) Sale of ticket, booking  and delivery of parcels , luggage  and goods ; 
II) Refund  of over-charges  in passenger  fares  and freight  rates;  
III) Waiver and refund  of demurrage  and wharfage  Charges ; 
IV) Clearance of station o utstanding  i.e., recovery and remittance  of dues 
short -recovered or not recovered;  
V) Remittance  of station earnings ; 
VI) Ticket checking arrangements;  
VII) Settlement  of cla ims for compensation ; 
VIII) Taking measures  for claims prevention;  
IX) Levy of siding charges  and dealing with siding agreements;  
X) Provision  and management  of Cloak -Rooms;  
XI) Runn ing of Lost Property  Offices (LPOs);  
XII) Marketing  and sales  activities i.e., canvassing for high  profit  yielding 
commodities , maintenance  of customer -oriented services  viz., own your 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
241 
For internal use of IA&AD  wagon  scheme, leasing  of SLRs  scheme, measures  for tackling rail -road 
competition, etc.;  
XIII) Justification  for introduction of new  trains ; 
XIV)  Conducting traffic  surveys  to establish justification  for new  line, etc.;  
XV) Grant  of credit  facilities to customers  (credit  note facility);  
XVI)  Grant  of concessions  in railway  fares  and freight  rates, including specia l 
facilities for tourist coaches , etc.;  
XVII)  Attention to complaints  from the users;  
XVIII)  Arrangements for handling of goods  - appointment  of handling 
contractors  for stations  and transhipment  points;  
XIX)  Holding and conducting meetings with railway  users at Divisional  levels 
such as SCC  (Station  Consultative  Committee ), DRUCC  (Divisional Rail  
Users Consultative Committee), ZRUCC  (Zonal  Rail Users Consultative 
Committee), NRUCC  (National  Rail User s Consultative Council ) and 
matters related to it;  
XX) Opening/Closing and renewal  of ‘City Booking  Offices’, ‘City Booking 
Agencies ’ and ‘Out agencies ’; 
XXI)  Engaging RTSAs  (Rail  Travellers Service  Agents), JTBSs (Jan Sadharan  
Ticket Booking  Sevaks), GTBSs (Grameen Ticket Booking Sevaks), 
ensure proper up keeping of waiting rooms, retiring rooms, drink ing water  
supply , etc., at every station;  
XXII)  Provision  of ATVMs , Co-TVMs  etc.; 
XXIII)  Reply to RTI  cases;  
XXIV)  Furnishing of data for printing of Zonal  Time Table and Tr ain at a Glance 
along with  advertisements  to generate revenue;  
XXV)  Provision  of Books , Forms, UTS & PRS  tickets  and Reservation  Slips, 
etc.; 
XXVI)  Provision  and maintenance  of UTS & PRS  Equipment  at 
Divisions /Stations;  
XXVII)  Awarding and management  of contracts  for 2 Wheeler/4 Wheele r parking 
in station premises;  
XXVIII)  Awarding and management  of contracts  for commercial  plots and  
XXIX)  Awarding contracts  for running  of stalls at platforms . 
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
List of activities at various levels are enumerated below:  
Table -01 
LEVEL  MAIN ACTIVITY  ALLIED/SUB ACTIVITY  
Railway  
Board  Level  Framing of Rules  for 
Goods  Activities   Sanctions  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
242 
For internal use of IA&AD   Rate structure for freight  based 
on classification  of 
commodities  
 Goods  shed facilities  
 Free time  and 
Demurrage /Wharfage  Rules  
 Policy  on sidings  
 Acceptance of payment through 
various modes  
 Rules  for carriage of dangerous 
goods  
 Introduct ion of New  Freight  
Schemes  
Framing of Rules  for 
Coaching  Activities   Sanctions  
 Notification of Fare  and 
Surcharges on passenger  tickets  
 Tariff  rules  of IRCTC  
 Introduction of new  trains  
 Introduction of Special  Trains 
including notification on 
Charges  for special  
train/coaches  
 Different types of Concessions  
applicable to passengers  
 Policy  on coaching  refunds  
Licensing  of Railway  
Land   Licensing  of Railway  land as 
commercial  plots for stacking 
purposes in Goods  sheds , 
installation of weigh Bridges , 
etc. 
Policy  on Claims   Policy  dealing with claims on 
POL traffic , FCI traffic , lost  
luggage /parcels , etc.  
 Accident  claims compensation  
under section  124 and 124A of 
Railways  Act 
Railway  
Board  Level Policy  on Freight  
Marketing   Policy  for Premier customers  
 Development  of new  customer  
facilities  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
243 
For internal use of IA&AD  & Apex  
Level   Special  scheme for freight  
traffic 
Policy  on Coaching  
activities   Traffic  survey  for justification  
of new  lines  etc. 
 Provision  of Passenge r 
Amenities  such as 
waiting/Retiring  Rooms, 
Drinking Water , Water Cooler, 
High  Level Platform,  Bridge , 
etc. 
 Re-categorization of Stations 
based on Number of passenger , 
its earnings  and footfall  
 Ticket checking arrangement to 
curb ticketless  travels and 
improve earnings . 
Policy  on Parcel  
Marketi ng  Revision  of rates for Parcel , 
Luggage  and other coaching  
traffic  
 All policy  matters with regard to 
Luggage  
 Rationalisation  scheme for 
Booking  and carriage of Parcel  
traffic  
 Special  scheme for 
development  of Parcel  traffic  
 Policy  for leasing  parcel  space 
in the brake vans and parcel  
vans, Refrigerated  vans 
Improvements/up 
gradation of Passenger  
Amenities   Issue  regarding lack of basic 
amenities /Infrastructural 
facilities  
 Specific amenities  such as Lifts, 
Escalators, o Bridges , etc.  
Improving 
Infrastructure  
involving cust omer  
service   Policy  on procurement  of 
wagons  through Private  
Investment like Own your 
Wagon  scheme, Wagon 
investment  scheme,  etc. 
 Development  of terminal  
through Private  investment  like 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
244 
For internal use of IA&AD  Private Freight  Terminal (PFT), 
Terminal Incentive  cum Engine  
on Load (TI ELS), etc.  
 Development  of warehousing  
through Private  Investment . 
Public  Grievance   Policy  and Functioning of 
Public  Grievances  Redressal  
Machinery  on the Railways . 
RTI Cell  Receipt  and registration  of RTI  
references  
 Ensuring speedy repli es. 
Apex  Level 
& Field Unit  
Level  Dissemination of 
Railway  Board  
circulars  and orders   Receipt , circulation and 
adherence of the received 
circular /orders.  
Apex  Level 
& Field Unit  
Level  IT Applications   Freight  Operations  Information  
System  (FOIS ) which has  got 
two components , Rake  
Management  System (RMS ) 
and Terminal Management 
System (TMS ) 
 Unreserved  Ticketing System  
(UTS ), Passenger  Reservation  
System (PRS ) & Parcel  
Management  System (PMS ) 
 Information /Data  available in 
PRIMES  
Field Unit  
Level  Goods   Demand  Registration , 
placement and other activities  
 Generation  of Railway  Receipt  
(RR)-Outward  
 Inward  RRs. 
 Unloading and removal of 
consignment  
 Demurrage /Wharfage  
 Entering into Contracts  with 
siding owners and realisation of 
Railway  dues 
 Collection  of Station  earnings  
and accountal  
 Adaptation  of new  schemes  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
245 
For internal use of IA&AD   Claims  
 TIA reports  
 Station  Balance  Sheet  
Coac hing  Unreserved  Ticketing System  
(UTS ) 
 Passenger  Reservation  System  
(PRS ) 
 Parcel  Management  System  
(PMS ) 
 Provision  ATVM , JTBS , Halt , 
Out Agency , Issue  of Ticket 
through Post  Office  (IPPPRS), 
new PRS Centres, etc.  
 Collection  of Station  earnings  
and accountal  
 Claims  
 TIA Reports  
 Special  Trains  
 Refunds  
 Station  Balance  Sheet  
Licensing  and Leasing    Licensing  of Railway  land for 
stacking purposes  
 Licensing  of Parking  places at 
Stations  
 Licensing  of stall at Platforms 
and Station  buildings  
 Leasing  of space in SLR /SLRD  
 Leasing  of Parcel  van including 
refrigerati on van  
 Commercial  advertisements  in 
stations , etc.  
(Com pliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 3.15, 4.7 to 4.8)  
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS  
The risk  analysis  for the Commercial  Department  should be done on the 
following parameters : 
I) Quantum  of Earnings  
II) Number of Railway  Receipts /Parcel  way bills /Passenger  tickets  dealt  
III) When last audited  viz., Audited  last one year/three years/five years/never 
audited  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
246 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Audit  perception based on Outstanding ’s/Unrealised amo unt, News Paper 
Publication , Complaints  lodged, internal  audit  report of Indian  Railways . 
V) Result  of last audit  -pendin g paras.  
VI) Different Tender  cases/Contract  cases/other misc. cases.  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 3.9 to 3.11 & 4.13 to 4.15)  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN COMMERCIAL DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  have implemented various  IT Applications  in the last few 
years. Presently, following IT Applications are in use in the Commercial  
Department . Detailed  information can be extracted for exercisin g the audit  
checks . 
(Chapter -3 of Regulation of Audit  and Account  (Amendments ) 2020 , Information  
Technology  Audit  Manual  Volume-I, II to III. Standing  Order on Auditing  in an 
Information Technology  (IT) environment 2020.  Para 4.20 - Compliance  auditing  
in digital  environm ent of the Compliance Auditing Guidelines  2016 ) 
6.1 Freight  Operations  Information  System  (FOIS ) 
Objective  and advantages of FOIS  
FOIS  is a reporting system  where goods  working is computerized . It is designed 
to give strategic  advantages to both Indian  Railways  and its customers . The 
implementation  of the system  is envisaged to eventually achieve the following:  
Salient Features of FOIS  
I) Monitoring  of all freight  trains  either by Railways  or by goods  customers  
II) Details of Rakes/Wagons  available in various yards , eliminating the need 
for costly manual  document ation  and tedious retrieval systems  
III) Managerial reports  regarding availability of rolling stock  i.e. wagons  and 
locomotives  at any point of time  for better planning  for the most efficient 
utilization  
IV) Improved work  environment has significantly simplified planning  and 
execution  of assigned tasks  
V) Interactive  web based solutions to give customized reports  to Railway  
Board , Zonal  Railways  and Divisions . 
It has two components  namely, RMS  (Rake  Management  System ) and TMS  
(Terminal Management System).  
6.1.1 RMS  (Rake  Management  System ) 
RMS  deals with real time  operating activities such as:  
I) Formation/Operating  placement of a r ake 
II) Dissipation of a r ake 
III) Attachment and detachment of wagons  from a rake  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
247 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Attachment and detachment of Loco  
V) Running  of Train  in the system  as per physical  movement  
VI) Handing /Taking over of Goods  trains  at Divisional /Zonal  interchange 
points  
VII) Various queries pertaining to Rake  Management  System . 
6.1.2 TMS  (Terminal  Management  System ) 
TMS  deals with Commercial  activities:  
All the commercial  activities performed at Goods  handling points can be reported 
in the TMS . Starting from Indent registration  up to the task of printing of RR  can 
be done using TMS facility. The major  functions  of Terminal Management  
System  are:  
I) Indent Registration  with Wagon  Demand  Registratio n Fee (WDRF) 
collection details  
II) Forwarding Note preparation  
III) Commercial  placement of a Rake  for loading /un-loading , Release of the 
Rake as loaded or empty  as the case may be, Re -booking  of a rake , if 
applicable, Filling up of Loading/Unloading register  
IV) Feeding consignment removal details  
V) Checking for automatic  accrual  of Demurrage  and Wharfage  charges  
VI) RR generation with automatic  accrual  of freight  charges  
VII) Issue  of Railway  Receipt  for various types of traffic  including for 
Container  Traffic  
VIII) Provision  for feeding of payment details of Freight  
IX) Provision  for feeding waival details of Dem urrage  and Wharfage  Charges  
X) Provision  for feeding of balance  Demurrage  and Wharfage  Charges  
collections  
XI) Reporting for Re mission  of station earnings  in to bank /cash  office  
XII) Provision  for feeding of various charges  pertaining to goods  working at a 
station/siding  
XIII) Automat ic preparation of Goods  balance  sheet in the system  
XIV)  Provision  for various queries  
XV) Provision  for getting various reports  (save/print).  
Importa nt features  of TMS  are: 
I) No manual  intervention in feeding of goods  distances  
II) Facility for importing distances from RBS  
III) All the commercial  rules  are fed a t CRIS /NDLS and the same are 
automatically implemented through FOIS  system  
IV) The details relevant to a particular location/consignment are to be fed at 
the location  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
248 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Rest of the rules  common to goods  working are fetched from back end 
and implemented accordingly  
VI) Instant messaging facility to anywhere on Indian  Railways  having FOIS  
facility  
VII) Data  access to all the stak e holders in real term basis  
VIII) Complete transparency in goods  working  
IX) The information available in FOIS  can be accessed through internet by 
general users, e -customers  and Railway  staff by using their respective 
user IDs and Passwords.  
E-Payment  of Freight  
This facility has been implemented at all the major  sidings /goods  sheds  for 
various c ustomers . Various provisions pertaining to e -payment are implemented 
through TMS . Originating  point intimates electronically the freight  charges  due 
to the bank  server concerned. After transfer of funds from customer ’s account  to 
Railway ’s account , a message "Successful Transaction" appears and a “Paid E -
RR” is printed  at the originating point. In case of exigencies (failure  of 
communication  between CRIS  and Bank Server), an “E -RR” can be given on the 
strength  of customer ’s LC/Bank guarantee  available with Railways . Such 
transaction gets regularized whenever the technical  failure  gets rectified. In case 
of insufficient funds in the customer ’s account , system  prompts for preparation 
of a “To -pay ERR”. This facility is available round the clock.  
6.2 Unreserved  Ticketing System  (UTS ) 
Unreserved  tickets  are issue d to the passengers  through this system  which are not 
specific to any train service . Unreserved ticket does not authorise reserved seats 
or berths. The main features  are: 
I) This is an online  system  based on networking  
II) Clusters have been defined by clubbing some stations  
III) Tickets  can be issued for journey starting from any station, other than 
ticket issuing station as well within clu ster 
IV) In this system  tickets  can be issued 3 days in advance for distances of 200 
km and above. For distances less than 200 km, tickets can be issued on 
the day of journey itself  
V) Money receipts  can be issued f or TC /TTE  cash and other miscellaneous  
cash received at booking  office  
VI) Due to presence of thin client , tickets  can be issued un -interrupted even 
in case of link failure  
VII) Maximum 4 passengers  can be booked on one ticket.  
Advantages t o Railway  
I) Required information is readily available to officers and management  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
249 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Resources  involved in indenting tickets  and their accountal can be saved  
III) Tickets  can be issued from any window/counter  
IV) Easy accountal.  
At the UTS  counter many reports  (i.e., Daily  reports, Periodical  reports and 
monthly  reports) are generated which will provide details viz., earnings  for the day, 
total number of passengers  travelled, number of cancelled ti ckets , etc.  
DAILY REPORTS  
1. SEASON  TICKETS  
2. ADVANCE SEASON  TICKETS  
3. SUMMARY  OF SEASON  NI TICKETS  
4. CANCELLED TICKETS  
5. SUMMARY  OF CANCELLED 
TICKETS  
6. SPL CANCELLED TICKETS  
7. SUMMARY  OF SPL CANCELLED 
TICKETS  
8. NON ISSUE  TICKETS  
9. TTE MONEY  RECEIPTS  
10. TC MONEY  RECEIPTS  
11. SUNDRIES AND OTHER EARNING  
12. ADHOC  CONCESSIONS  
13. CONCE SSIONS  (CONC PASSENGER)  
14. POLICE  VOUCHERS  
15. MILITARY  VOUCHERS  
16. CST 
17. RTC  CONCESSIONS  
18. BLANK PAPER TICKET  
19. SAFETY SURCHARGE  
20. SUPERVISOR INTERVENTION  21. STATION PAIR  
22. SUMM OF T RANS(CASH INFO)  
23. M-17 CONTINUITY  
24. TICKET INFORMATION  
25. M9 CLASSIFICATION  
26. CONCESSION 
PASSENGER(SEASON ) 
27. SPL CANCEL SEASON  TKT  
28. MELA  CHARGES SUMMARY  
29. ZONE WISE  SEG REGATED CASH  
30. ZONE WISE  PSGN 
CLASSIFICATION  
31. SUBURBAN PSG 
CLASSIFICATION  
32. JAN SHATABDI REPORT  
33. MONEY  RECEIPT & NET 
EARNING  
34. PAY VOUCHERS REPORT  
35. IZZAT  CONCESSION  
36. BALANCE SHEET  
37. SERVICE TAX  
38. STBS -M9 CLASSIFICATION  
39. POS TKT DETAIL  
40. UPI TRANSACTION  
PERIODICAL  REPORTS  
1. ADHOC  CONCESSIONS  
2. CANCELLED TICKETS  
3. CONCESSION TICKETS  
4. CST CONCESSION TICKETS  
5. POLICE  CONCESSIONS  
6. RTC  CONCESSIONS  
7. VCH CONCESSIONS  14. TICKET INFORMATION  
15. CASH INFORMATION  
16. M17  CONTINUITY  
17. SPL. CANCELLED TKTS  
18. SAFETY SURCHARGE  
19. CANCELLED MR  TKTS  
20. M9-SUBURBAN/NONSUB  
21. SUNDRIES  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
250 
For internal use of IA&AD  8. MILITARY  WARRANTS CONCES 
TKTS  
9. NON -ISSUED TKTS  
10. NON -ISSUED SEASON  TKTS  
11. STN PAIR STATEMENT  
12. M9 PASSENGER CLASSIFICA TION  
13. SEASON  TKTS  22. BALANCE SHEET  
23. SERVICE TAX  
24. STBS -M9 CLASSIFICATION  
25. SN2-PSGN  
MONTHLY REPORTS  
1. SEASON  TICKETS  
2. ADVANCE SEASON  TICKETS  
3. SEASON  NI TICKETS  
4. CANCELLED TICKETS  
5. SPL CANCELLED TICKETS  
6. NON ISSUE  TICKETS  
7. MISC RECEIPTS TIC KETS  
8. ADHOC  CONCESSIONS  
9. CONCESSION (CON PSGN)  
10. POLICE  VOUCHERS  
11. MILITARY  VOUCHERS  
12. CST VOUCHERS  
13. RTC  CONCESSION  
14. BLANK PAPER TICKET  15. SAFETY SURCHARGE  
16. STATION PAIR  
17. SUMM OF TR ANS(CASH INFO)  
18. M17  CONTINUITY  
19. TICKET INFORMATION  
20. M9 CLASSIFICATION  
21. SUPERVISOR INTERVENTION  
22. BALANCE SHEET  
23. ADVANCE STATEMENT  
24. SUBURBAN & NON -SUBURBAN 
M9 
25. SERVICE TAX  
26. STBS -M9 CLASSIFIC ATION  
27. STBS -COMMISSION REPORT  
6.3 Passenger  Reservation  System  (PRS ) 
PRS provides reservation  services to the passengers . PRS appli cation  CONCERT 
(Countrywide Network of Computerised Enhanced Reservation  & Ticketing) is 
the online  reservation application  developed and maintained by Centre  for 
Railway  Information  System  (CRIS -CRIS is an Autonomous  organisation  under 
the Ministry  of Railways . It develops and manag es the Information Technology  
Applications  of the Indian  Railway. CRIS also provides IT  applications  for non -
railway  Government  and Public  Sector  Organisations ).The travelling  public  can 
reserve a seat/berth on any train between any pair of stations  for any date and 
class. F ollowing are the reports  that are generated under PRS:  
DAILY REPORTS LIST  
1. STMT ON CASH & PSGNR INFO  
2. STMT ON CASH INFORMATIONS  
3. STMT ON TKT & PSGN DETAIL  
4. STMT ON GROSS EARNG DETLS  
5. STMT ON SITEWISE GRS EARN  
6. STMT ON VOUCHER INFORMATION  35. STMT ON GROSS GAUGE BASED  
36. STMT ON SPECIAL CANCELTNS  
37. STMT ON OPER PERSONL CASH  
38. STMT ON CANCLTN ON REFUND  
39. STMT ON BPT BKG TRANSACTN  
40. STMT ON BPT MOD TRANSACTN  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
251 
For internal use of IA&AD  7. STMT ON CST BKG INFORMATION  
8. STMT ON CONC W.SUPPRT VCH  
9. STMT ON CONC W/O SUPT VCH  
10. STMT ON CANCELLED TICKETS  
11. STMT ON MD/SPLCAN TICKETS  
12. STMT ON NON -ISSUE TICKETS  
13. STMT ON CANCELATN SUMMARY  
14. STMT ON RTC  BKG TRANSCTNS  
15. STMT ON STOCK CONTINUITY  
16. STMT ON ORIGINATING EARNG  
17. STMT ON BANK CARD  TICKETS  
18. STMT ON BANK CARD  CAN TKT  
19. STMT ON BANK CARD  MOD TKT  
20. STMT ON GROSS EARNG(L/F)  
21. STMT ON SOT -OPERATRWISE  
22. STMT ON MILITARY  WARRANTS  
23. STMT ON E -CARD  CANC/MODFN  
24. STMT ON DUPLICATE  TICKETS  
25. STMT ON DIFERENCE OF FARE  
26. STMT ON HOURLY TXN NORMAL  
27. STMT ON HRLYTXN BF 08 HRS  
28. STMT ON HRLYTXN AF 20 HRS  
29. STMT ON BILL REGISTER TXN  
30. STMT ON VOUCHER REGISTERS  
31. STMT ON LINKING VOUCHER TXN  
32. STMT ON LOSS ON CONCESION  
33. STMT ON RESFEE & OTHRCHRG  
34. STMT ON TXN -SUMM.CONSLDT  41. STM T ON GRS(FARE -BREAKUP)  
42. STMT ON MODFICATN 
SUMMARY  
43. STMT ON PRESS  VCHR UTILZN  
44. STMT ON I -TKT CANCELLATNS  
45. STMT ON I -TKT CANCN.RFNDS  
46. STMT ON UPI  TXN DISCOUNTS  
47. STMT ON UPI -TRANSACTIONS  
48. STMT ON UPI  ANNEX B CC75  
49. STMT ON PENDING AMT DETLS  
50. STMT ON HRLY TATKAL  DETLS  
51. STMT ON GO -INDIA CARD  TXN  
52. SUMMARY  OF CASH INFO -NRH  
53. STMT ON RFND ON UTS -OPR  
54. STMT ON RFND ON UTS -TXN  
55. STMT ON GST  FOR TALLYINGS  
56. STMT ON GST  ALL COMPONENT  
57. STMT ON RTSA BKG TXNSWISE  
58. STMT ON RTSA BKG TRMLWISE  
59. STMT ON AUTHORITY TKT BKG  
60. STMT ON AUTHORITY TKT CAN  
61. STMT ON AUTHORITY TKTS NI  
62. STMT ON PRE -BOUGHT TICKTS  
63. STMT ON AUTHORITY TKTS SC  
64. STMT ON CATERING CHARG ES 
65. STMT ON BANK SBI  POS TXN  
66. STMT ON BANK POSMIS RLYS  
67. STMT ON BANK OFFLN REFUND  
MONTHLY REPORTS  
1. DAILY SUMMARY  (CASH & PSGN 
INF)  
2. DAILY SUMMARY (CASH INFO)  
3. SUMMARY  OF GROSS EARNINGS  
4. GROSS EARNINGS(GA UGE WISE ) 
5. GROSS EARNINGS(LOCAL 
FOREIGN)  
6. STATEMENT OF VOUCHERS  
7. STATEMENT OF CST  
8. STMT.OF CONC.(WITH 
SUPPORTING)  
9. STMT.OF CONC.(W/O SUPPORTING)  26. LINKING STATEMENT OF 
VOUCHERS  
27. STMT OF FARE BREAKUP(DAY 
WISE ) 
28. STMT OF FARE -BREAKUP(CLS 
WISE ) 
29. STMT OF PRESS  VCHR 
UTILIZATION  
30. STMT OF I -TKT 
CANCELLATIONS  
31. STMT OF I -TKT CANC.ON 
REFUND  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
252 
For internal use of IA&AD  10. STMT.OF CANCELLED TKT  
11. STMT.OF MD/SPLCAN TKT  
12. STMT.OF NON ISSUE  TKT  
13. RTC  STATEMENT  
14. CONTINUITY  STATEMENT  
15. MONTHLY STS STATEMENT  
16. BANK CARD  TKTS STMNT(DAY 
TTL)  
17. IRCT STATEMENT  
18. STMT. OF DIFF OF FARE  
19. STATEMENT OF RESV.FEE  
20. STATEMENT OF FREEDOM FIGHTER  
21. STATEMENT OF HOR  
22. STATEMENT OF POLICE /JAIL REQ  
23. BILL REGISTER  
24. VOUCHER REGISTER  
25. REPORT ON COACHING  REFUNDS  32. BANK CARD  TKTS 
STMNT.(NORMAL)  
33. CLS-WISE  GROS EARNINGS 
RLYWISE  
34. SUMMARY  OF TXN -
CONSOLIDATED  
35. SUMMARY  OF SERVICE TAX  
36. CLASSWISE SUMM -SERVICE 
TAX  
37. STM T ON PENDING AMNT 
COLLECT  
38. ATMNT ON AUTHORITY 
BOOKING  
39. STMNT ON AUTHORITY 
REFUNDS  
40. ZONE -WISE  STMT OF SERVICE 
TAX  
41. ZON/CLASS STMT OF SERVICE 
TAX  
42. STMT OF GO_INDIA CARD  TXNS  
43. STMT OF GCARD 
RECONCILATNS  
44. STMT OF AUTHORITY NON -ISSU  
45. STMT OF A UTHORITY SPL -CANC  
46. STMT OF BANKS SBI  POS TXNS  
47. STMT OF BANKS OFFLN RFNDSS  
48. STMT OF GST  COLLECT/REFUND  
49. STMT OF GST (FOR TALLYING)  
50. STMT OF UPI  BASED TRANTXNS  
MISC/ADHOC  REPORT LIST  
1. STMT ON  LOGIN/LOG OUT TXNS  
2. STMT ON  EXTN OF WAITLIST  
3. STMT ON  TRN STATUS SETTNG  
4. STMT ON  CHANG OF NAME TXN  
5. STMT ON  CHANG OF BOARDING  
6. STMT ON  TIME BASED BOOKNG  
7. STMT ON  IDLE TIME OPERTRS  8. STMT ON  FIRST PNRs 
BOOKED  
9. STMT ON  INCOMING ARP 
BKGS  
10. STMT ON  BLOCK BOOKNG 
TXNS  
11. STMT ON  TATKAL  
TRANSACTIONS  
12. STMT ON  MOD -TXNS  
13. STMT ON  TATKAL  
TRANSACTION  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
253 
For internal use of IA&AD  14. STMT ON  FULLY CANCLD 
TRNS  
ACCOUNTING –REPORTS  
1. DAILY REPORTS -PRINTING  
2. PERIODIC  REPORTS -PRINTING  
3. MONTHLY REPORTS -PRINTING  4. REPORTS OF OTHER  PRS 
5. STATIONS STATISTICS 
REPORTS  
6. ZONEWISE DAILY REPORTS  
PERIODICAL  REPORTS  
1. PERIODICAL  SUMMARY (CASH 
&PSG)  
2. PERIODICAL  SUMMARY (CASH 
INFOR)  
3. PERIODICAL  SUMMARY  (TKT & 
PSG)  
4. SUMMARY  OF GROSS EARNINGS  
5. GROSS EARNINGS(GAUGE WISE ) 
6. GROSS 
EARNINGS(LOCAL/FOREIGN)  
7. GROSS EARNINGS (PRS  SITE 
WISE ) 
8. PERIODICAL /MONTHLY ST TS 9. STMT OF FARE 
BREAKUP(DAY WISE ) 
10. STMT OF FARE BREAKUP(CLS 
WISE ) 
11. STMT OF ZONEWISE GROSS 
REPORT  
12. SUMMARY  OF SERVICE TAX  
13. CLASSWISE SUMM -SERVICE 
TAX  
14. STMNT ON PENDING AMT 
COLLECT  
15. STMNT ON AUTHORITY BKGS  
6.4 Parcel  Management  System  (PMS ) 
This application  will help in preparation of the parcel  way bill s. This module  
would be updated with latest parcel /luggage  rules  and rates, lease rules , etc.  
Reports  generated in PMS  are as given below:  
1. LOADING  SUMMARY  
2. LEASE MANIFEST  
3. LEASE CARGO  LOADIN G 
4. UNLOADING  SUMMARY  
5. LEASE UNLOADING  
6. LEASE CARGO  UNLOADING  
7. FOR WARDING  NOTE CUM 
PARCEL BOOKING  
8. DELIVERY GATE PASS  
9. VP DEMAND REGISTER  
10. LPO  AUCTION/REPORT  
11. BOOKING AND DELIVERY 
SUMMARY  
12. PARCEL CASH REGISTER  23. SUMMARY  OF BARCODE 
COUNT REPORT  
24. MODIFIED UNLOADING  
REPORT  
25. TM35 REPORT  
26. WHARFAGE COLLECTED  
27. UNDERCHARGE REPORT  
28. LOGIN SUMMARY  
29. BOOKING DETAILS  
30. DELIVERY ITEM DETAILS  
31. ITEM DETAILS  
32. LIST OF GIB AND NORMAL 
PARTY  
33. STATION REPORT  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
254 
For internal use of IA&AD  13. PARCEL CASH REGISTE 
(SUMMARIZED)  
14. OVER CARRIAGE OF PACKAGES 
AT STATION  
15. GST  REPORT  
16. CARDPAY DETAILS  
17. REALIZATION OF PERCENTAGE 
CHARGE  
18. CANCELLATION/REFUND 
STA TEMENT  
19. ITEM -TRAINWISE BOOKING 
SUMMARY  
20. WHARFAGE FORGONE 
STATEMENT  
21. ACTUAL LOADING  REPORT  
22. PROPOSED LOADING  REPORT  34. LOADING  UNLOADING  
REPORT  
35. INWARD REPORTS  
36. LEASE REPORT S 
37. FSLA  
38. PARTY MASTER  
39. FSLA PARTY MASTER  
40. BARCODE STOCK 
INVENTORY  
41. ASSET INVENTORY  
42. VP AVAILABILITY MASTER  
43. TRAIN LAST STATIONIN 
RAILWAY  
44. TRAIN Q   UOTA  
6.5  Information /Data  Available in Data Ware House  
A Data  Warehouse  is a central  repository  for all or significant parts of the data 
that an enterprise ’s various business system  collects.  
Benefits of the Data  Ware House  for Indian  Railway  are: 
I) Optimisation of Railway  revenues by trend analysis  
II) Reply of Parliament  questions  
III) Furnishing information for RTI  queries and Court  cases  
IV) Information  for analysis  by Vigilance  and Audit  
V) Fraud  detection  
VI) Impact analysis  of newly launched PRS  policies and concessions  
VII) Thorough analysis  of Quota  utilisation and redistribution  
VIII) Occupancy and Earnings  reports  help in identifying less  popular 
trains /route  
IX) Identification  of popular sectors for attachment of coaches /planning  of 
new trains  
X) Identifying underutilised portions of t he journeys etc.  
7 AUDIT FOCUS AREAS -CHECKLIST  
Audit  check should be exercised based on the provisions contained in Indian  
Railway  Act, 1989 , Rules  etc., made thereafter, Orders, Rules & Regulations  
issued by the President  & Railway Board , Conference regulations  frame d by the 
IRCA , Tariff  Rate Circulars , etc.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
255 
For internal use of IA&AD  In addition to these, there are following Manuals  and Code  Books  for guidance  
cum controlling of various activities of the Commercial  Department , which may 
also be considered while exercising Audit  checks :- 
I) Indian  Railway  Commercial  Manual  Vol.-I & Vol. II 
II) Manual  for Inspection  of Station  Accounts  
III) Indian  Railways  Code  for Traffic  (Commercial ) Department  
IV) Indian  Railway  Code  for Accounts  Department  Vol-II 
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 4.16 to 4.17 . Chapter 5 of Regulation of 
Audit and Account  (Amendments ) 2020 - Audit of Receipts -Para-22,23,32,34 ) 
7.1 Goods  Activities  
Railway  Board  revises the rate  structure for freight  based on the classification  of 
the commodities  from time  to time . Keeping in mind the premier  customers , 
Railway Board  takes the decisions on policies on extension of some benefits, 
introduction of special  schemes for freight  traffic  and development  of inter -modal 
transport  system , packing conditions of the commodities , special  condition 
attached to certain commod ities, minimum weight  conditions of commodities , 
permissible carrying capacity of wagons , rate  for railway  material  and stores , etc. 
Rules with regard to the free  time and Demurrage /Wharfage  rules , policy  on 
sidings  are dealt by Railway Board. Sanctions  connected to the Goods  Activities  
are also issued. Railway Board approves/finalise their decision to either accept or 
otherwise of the proposals received from Zonal  Railways  for introduction of n ew 
train, continuation of services of the newly introduced train, requesting stoppage 
of the existing services, opening of halt stations , etc.  
During Audit , the following should be seen:  
At Railway  Board  Level:  
I) Whether decision on policy  issues are taken on time  without delay  
II) Instructions /revisions to the circulars  are transmitted to the Zonal  
Railways  in advance of the dates prescribed  for implementation  of the 
same  
III) Reasons for delay are adequately investigated and responsibility, if any, 
is fixed  
IV) Whether was there a delay in taking decisions on the proposals received 
and also delay in forwarding the same to Zonal  Railways . Whether CRIS  
has updated the IT  Applications  in accordance with the Orders/Circu lars 
(Goods , Coaching  and Parcel ) issued by Railway  Board  from time  to time . 
V) Whether feedbacks were received from Zones after re view of  freight 
incentive schemes and action taken thereto.  
 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
256 
For internal use of IA&AD  At Apex  (Zonal ) Level:  
I) Whether on receipt  from Railway  Board , the orders on the revised 
rates/instructions  are being circulated for all the units  concerned for 
implementation  from the dates prescribed  
II) Whether follow up  action  was taken for receiving feedback  from Railway  
Board  on decisions on the proposals submitted by the Zonal  Railways  
III) Cases of delay, if any, are brought out and reasons analysed  
IV) The adverse impact  of these c hanges viz., fall in traffic  or receipts  are 
examined and highlighted to Railway Board . 
At Field Level, the detailed Audit  checks  would be conducted as under:  
7.1.1  Sanctio ns 
Sanctions  generally relate to Compensation  for Accident  victims, write off  of 
losses, write off  of error  sheets  (Zonal/Divisional ), payments arising out of 
Arbitration  Awards , etc. The arrangement in force for the receipt  and audit  of 
sanctions  by Railwa y Board , accorded by General  Manager  and subordinate  to 
General Manager , should be reviewed to ensure that such sanctions  come under 
Audit  scrutiny without any omission.  
  Audit  checks  would include the following:  
I) Whether the Sanction  is clear and definite  
II) Whether the sanction does not contravene any general or special  orders of 
any higher authority  
III) Whether Sanctions  are accorded by the competent  authority  as per the 
Schedule  of Powers and are issued on following the  existing rules  and 
regulations  
IV) Sanctions  to the write off  of losses should be traced to the ‘Register  of 
losses’ to verify whether all formalities have been taken care of before 
arriving at the decision.  
During Audit  of sanctions  for payments arising out of arbitration  award  it 
should be seen that:  
I) proper legal  and financial  advice was obtained before deciding on the 
necessity for arbitrations and that the points for arbitration  were reduced 
to specific terms and were not in any way left ambiguous or vague  
II) the Railway ’s case was properly pr epared and presented, utilising all 
available evidence for the purpose  
III) arbitration  was not rendered necessary on account  of any lack of precision 
in terms of the contract  
IV) adequate step was taken by th e Administration  to rectify any defects  in 
procedure which might have come to light.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
257 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.1.2  Booking  of Goods  Traffic  
Rating of Goods  traffic  - IRCA  Goods Tariff  No. 41, P -I, Vol.-I, Rule  No. 176 & 
IRCM V ol.-II, Para No. 1437 Following rates are applicable in goods  traffic : 
I) Class Rate -IRCA  Goods  Tariff  No. 48, P -I, Vol -II (General  
Classification ) IRCA Goods Tariff No. 48, P -II (Freight  Rate Table):  
Different types of commodities  are transported by Indian  Railways . 
Groups of commodities  with similar nature have been clubbed and each 
group is given a Main Head. Each main head  is allotted a specific number, 
which is known as Class Rate. Class fixed  for each commodity , is given 
in ‘General Classification of Goods’ and rate  per tonne fixed on the basis 
of class and distance is given in Goods Rate Table.  
II) Lump sum Rate : These rates are fixed  by Railway  Board  for specific 
services. Benefit  of these rates is given on fulfilment of specific 
conditions, otherwise freight  will be charged on normal Class Rate e.g., 
Rates  for Freight  Forw arder Scheme  and Merry -Go-Round  
III) Wagon  Per K m Rate: Irrespective of the goods  loaded in the wagon , 
freight  is charged on rate  per km basis. E.g. Haulage  rates of Container  
Traffic . 
IV) Station  to Station Rates  (STS) : Station -to-station  rate is a special  
reduced rate  quoted for a particular commodity  between the specific pairs 
of stations . This is done to garner more traffic  from road and other modes 
with an intension to compete with road transport . 
V) Haulage charges : These rates are fixed by Railway Board  for privately 
owned wagons, viz. container wagons operated by CONCOR and private 
operators, automobile wagons under AFTO (Automobile Freight Train 
Operator) Scheme and special purpo se wagons under LSFTO 
(Liberalized Special freight Train Operator) Schem  
Demand /Registration   
Every consignment of goods , when brought to a station or siding for despatch by 
a Goods  train, sho uld invariably be accompanied by a forwarding note in the 
appropriate  form. The consignor would place an indent  on payment of Wagon  
Demand  Registration  Fee (WDRF), the det ails of which will be entered in the 
Wagon Demand Register . 
Conditions for Forfeiture of Wagon  Registration  Fee: 
I) Cancellation  of indent  after physical  supply  of wagon  
II) Non-payment of freight  as per rule  
III) Cancellation  of indent  within 10 days of registration  
IV) Non-commencement of loadi ng within stipulated free  time 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
258 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) If a party request for permission of loading  after expiry of free  time, but 
loading  is not started and indent  is cancelled, WRF will be forfeited and 
demurrage  will be charged without giving free  time. 
Conditions for Refund  of Wagon  Registration  Fee 
I) After completion  of loading  in supplied wagons  and thereafter booking  
procedure such as payment of freight  
II) Non supply  of wagons  by railway  up to 10 days of registration  and 
subsequent cancellation  by the customer  
III) Non receipt  of any order/message regarding supply  of wagons  up to 10 
days of registration  and subsequent cancellation  
IV) Bans/Restrictions imposed, and cancellation  of indents  before they are 
lifted  
V) If open wagons  are supplied ag ainst an indent  of covered  wagons  or vice -
versa.  
While checking the Register  of Wagon  Registration  fee, the verification  should 
be on the  above points i.e., either for forfeiture or for refund . In cases of loading  
by the indenter within the given period, it should be seen whether the WDRF has 
been correctly adjusted with the Freight  Charges . Where wagons  could not be 
supplied as per indent , reasons for the same should be analysed to see that this 
has not resulted in loss  of traffic . It should also be seen that where such instances 
of non - supply  are regular, suitable remedial  measures  have been initiated.  
(Ref: Para  1408 to 1411 of IRCM Vol.II)   
7.1.3 Railway  Receipts  (RRS -Goods  Invoices ) 
Periodical  revision  of the Rate  as well as Classification  of commodities  including 
guidelines  on permissible carrying capacity (PCC ) of different types of wagons  
carried in different types of routes  loaded with different commodities  would be 
issued by Railway  Board . In each station, separate bundles of Accounts  foils of 
Invoices  would be made as fo llows:  
I) Local  ‘To-Pay’ 
II) Local  ‘Paid’  
III) Through ‘To Pay ’ 
IV) Through ‘Paid’  
During Accounts  check of the invoices, following are some of the important 
points that need to be seen:  
I) The receipts /invoices(both manual  and those generated on FOIS ) are 
correctly prepared as per extant  instructions  in force viz., all particulars 
are filled in, classification  correctly adopted, weights are correctly entered 
as per weighment  statement, charges  are correctly assessed, consignments  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
259 
For internal use of IA&AD  required to be booked as paid are not erroneously booked as to -pay. Other 
charges  where leviable are checked completely.  
During the audit  of RRs , it should be seen:  
II) Whether the latest updated rules /regulations  have been taken care of while 
arriving at the total freight  to be collected  
III) Whether distance between the stations  has been correctly adopted  
IV) Whether Permissible  Carrying Capacity (PCC ) of the Wagons  are adop ted 
correctly  
V) Whether freight  has been collected according to the loading  i.e., 
wagonload  or trainload  basis  
VI) Whether the weighment  statement ( Refer 7.1.3 below ) has been 
accompanied with the RR , detention  charges  collected for load adjustment 
and punitive charges  (Refer 7.1.3 below ), if any, has been correctly 
recovered  
VII) In case of a part payment of the total frei ght involved, to -pay surcharge  
has to be assessed for the remaining freight  amount to be paid which has 
to be collected at the destination  station(if not recovered at the ori ginating 
station)and the credit  has to be received at originating station  
VIII) It should also be seen whether all Railway  dues and other charges  have 
been recovered before delivery of goods . 
Rationali sation  of Routes  
Further, it should be examined to see whether the rakes  have moved via longer 
routes  instead of the booked shorter route . It is also to be analysed to see wh ether 
the longer route should have been rationalized  to avoid the loss  of revenue due to 
extra haulage  in the longer route instead of the booked shorter route (In certain 
cases due to any cause beyond contr ol of Railway  Administration  or due to 
congestion  in the yard  or any other operational  reasons, goods  are carried over a 
route other th an the route by which such goods  are booked. As per Railway Act , 
1989, it is the duty  of Railway Board  to rationalize such longer route carried but 
feasible route to compensate extra expenditure  due to extra haulage  of goods  
rakes  to reach the destination  station).  If action  is not taken for rationalization  of 
routes  based on the movement of rakes , the issue  has to be brought to the notice 
of the Railway Administration.  
Weigh Bridge  And Weighment  Statement  
Goods  are transported either in b ags or loose. Commodities transported in loose 
such as coal, iron ore, etc., are to be weighed  at the originating stations  by wagon  
weighbridges  wherever these exist. Where the weighbridge s do not exist at the 
originating stations, the wagons  are to be weighed  en-route  or at destination  
points before effecting delivery to the consignees. Weighment  is necessar y not 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
260 
For internal use of IA&AD  only to plug the leakage of revenue due to overloading of wagons /rakes , but also 
to discourage overloading of wagons /rakes  to avoid damage  to rolling stock  as 
well as the track /path. Interface between the weighbridge and Train  Management  
System  (TMS ) of FOIS  exists which allows direct  transmission of weig hment 
informati on from weighbridge to the FOIS and  it should also be seen whether 
connectivity between FOIS and Weigh bridges were provided in such locations  
Non-weighment  of wagons  causes loss  of revenue on account  of overloading of 
wagons . Railway  Board  emphasized that all loading  points should be covered  by 
the weighbridges  so that there is 100 per cent weighment of all rakes . Also, the 
Zonal  Railways  has to notify associated weighbridges for each loading  point 
without weighbridge. Further, alternate  weighbridges are also required to be 
notified for loading  points with weighbridge and for associated weighbridges in 
cases of breakdown of such weighbridges.  
In cases of absence of weighment  statements, Audit  has to check the reasons for 
non-weighment of rakes  and it should also be checked as to why the weighment 
was not made even at the associated weighbridges . Occurrence of cases of non -
weighment in a routine manner has to  be brought to the notice of the 
Administration  for rectification.  
Check  for RRs  prepared on Railway  Material  Consignment Notes  and the 
inward RRs is to be cond ucted on the above lines.  
Mis-Declaration of Goods  
According to the Section  66 of Railway  Act, consigno r should correctly declare 
the name of goods  on Forwarding Note, so that freight  can be charged by the 
correct class rate  at the time  of booking . If consignor is not in a position to d eclare 
the correct name of goods , such goods  will be treated as unclassified goods  and 
freight  will be charged according to the type of wagon . However, consignor may 
mis-declare the go ods so as to get benefit of low rates and also to book goods  on 
which ban has been imposed. Due to mis -declaration , Railways  loses revenue and 
banned goods  may be booked and  hence Goods  should be checked regularly at 
Destination station.  
Penalty would be charged according to Section  163 of Railway  Act, in case of 
booking  of banned goods  or frequent mis -declaration  of goods . Penal  charges  will 
be in addition to the freight  already collected. Also, according to Section 102 (a) 
of Railway Act , Railway administration will not be responsible for damage  of 
mis-declared goods  during transit.  
It should be verified to see if there are cases of mis -declaration  of goods  and for 
the cases noticed, Audit  has to review whether action  has been initiated by the 
administration according to rules  in force.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
261 
For internal use of IA&AD  (Ref: Para  Nos. 953 & 954 of IRCM Vol -I, Para No.1416 & 1417 of IRCM,  
Vol-II) 
Punitive  Charges  for Overloading  a Wagon  
Where a consignor loads goods  in a wagon  beyond its permissible capacity, a 
railway  administration may, in addition to the freight  and other charges , reco ver 
from the consignor, the consignee  or the endorsee, as the case may be, charges  
by way of penalty  at such rates (Punitive  Charges), as may be prescribed , before 
the de livery of the goods . 
During Audit  Check , the following points are to be verified:  
I) It should be seen that the punitive charges  are recovered as per the latest 
specified rates  
II) Whether detention  charges , if any, due to detention  of wagons  on account  
of load adjustment of the overloaded wagons  was recovered  
III) Assessed Punitive  charges  are collected before releasing the rake  from the 
station/siding  
IV) Recurrence of the cases of overloading should be viewed seriously.  
(Ref: Para  No.1878 of IRCM Vol. II)   
7.1.4  Levy and Waiv er of Demurrage  and Wharfage  Charges  
Demurrage  and Wharfage  are defined in the Railways  Act, 1989  (No. 24 of 1989) 
as under:  
"Demurrage " means the charge levied for the detention  of any rolling stock  after 
the expiry of free  time, if any, allowed for such detention . "Wharfage " means 
the charge levied on goods  for not removing them from the railway  premises  after 
the expiry of the free  time for such removal.  
Section  30(2) of the same Act  gives powers to the Central  Governm ent to fix 
from time  to time  by general or special  order, the rates of demurrage  and wharfage  
and to specify the conditions subject to which such rates shall ap ply. Relevant 
extract of this Section is reproduced below:  
"The Central  Government  may, by a like order, fix the rates of any other charges  
incidental to or connected with such carriage including demurrage  and wharfage  
for the whole or any part of the railway  and specify in the order the conditions 
subject to which such rates shall apply."  
Accounts  check on the Demurrage  and Wharfage  charges  returns  would 
include the following:  
I) The return is complete in all respects  
II) The number of hours/days for which demurrage /wharfage  is due, has been 
calcu lated in accordance with the Tariff  Rules  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
262 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) The customer  has to remit the Demurrage  and Wharfage  charges  due 
before requesting for waival  
IV) When wharfage  and demurrage  charges  have been foregone, an authority  
signed by a competent  officer of the Traffic  (Commercial ) Department  is 
forthcoming and all conditions attaching to the remission  of demurrage 
and wharfage have been fulfilled  
V) The ‘amount foregone’ agree with the sanction of the competent  authority  
and the ‘amount collec ted’ is correct  
VI) In cases of any short charges  or other irregularities , necessary error  sheets  
should be issued against the stations  concerned.  
VII) In case additional free time  was granted by specific orders, the 
justification of same should be checked with respect to current scenario.  
Audit  should check the demurrage  and wharfage  register /returns /statements to 
see the correctness of the assessment  of detention  hours after deducting the free  
time allowed for the respective type of wagons  as well as types of loading  
involved. Orders for  waival are to be checked to see whether the waival has been 
accorded according to the powers of the competent  authority . It should  also be 
seen whether the waiver  in all cases was extended b ased on the same reasons put 
forth by the customer  which may be further reviewed and taken up with the 
Administration  if necessary.  
[Ref: Chapter XI of IR  Code  for Traffic  (Commercial ) and Para  No.2343 for 
Accts. Dept. Vol. II]  
7.1.5 Siding  Charges  
An assisted/private  siding is a siding laid  out to serve a Government  Department  
factory , mill or other industrial premises other than a colliery  or a mining area 
under a special  Agreement . Where ever commercial  staff is pos ted for serving the 
siding, the wages  and other incidental charges  are paid by the siding authorities . 
Freight  for traffic  booked to or from a siding will be charged as freig ht on 
‘through distance basis’ or collect freight  up to serving station besides collecting 
siding charges  i.e., trip charges  or engine  hire charges . 
Audit  check s involve  the following:  
I) Latest siding charges  as revised from time  to time  has been collected from 
the siding authorities  
II) Freight   on ‘through distance basis’ is being collected withou t fulfilling 
the required conditions for such charging of freight. In all such cases, 
siding charges are to realised.  
III) It may also be seen that wherever necessary, trial trips have been 
conducted for taking a decision to revise siding ch arges  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
263 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) In cases where charges  are leviable separately for the inward and the 
outward movement of the rake , charges  have been levied for each 
operation  
V) In case of detention  to wagons  beyond the free  time allowed for loading  
and unloading , demurrage  charges  have been levied in accordance with 
the prescribed  Tariff  rates . 
VI) As siding charges are levied depending upon the type of loco utilised, it 
should be seen whether appropriate siding charges are collected for the 
type of locos, vis. Diesel or Electric loco.  
(Ref: Para  Nos.2517 to 2523 IRCM Vol II  and Para Nos. 2346 -2348 of IR  Code  
for Accts. Dept. –Part II ) 
7.1.6 New  Schemes  
Railway  Board  keeps introducing various new  schemes in additio n to the existing 
ones (like Mini Rake , Block  Rake, Two -Point combinations, etc.) to  attract and 
to woo the customers . Rebate, concession & other benefits would be extended 
which will be usually adjusted in the RR. 
Audit  should check whether the RRs  generated are based on the latest circulars  
and corrigendum to the circulars  issued relating to the scheme and the correct 
benefits are passed o n to the customers  without any loss  of revenue to railways.  
Audit  should also examine whether the intended objectives  of the scheme or the 
purpose for which the scheme has been introduced is b eing achieved. To check 
this, relevant material  pertaining to the scheme (with the data) should be 
examined for taking up the matter with the Administration , if necessary.  
(PPP Guidelines  may be referred to ) 
7.1.7 Travelling  Inspector  of Accounts  (TIA) Reports  
The check of initial records of accounts  maintained at stations , which do not come 
under the scrutiny of the Accounts  Office , is carried out by the Travelling  
Inspectors  of Station  Accounts  who are also responsible to check that the returns  
submitted by stations to the Accounts Office have been correctly prepared and 
agree with the initial records maintained at the stat ions. During their inspections , 
TIAs  will prepare reports  of the inconsistencies found out at the station.  
Audit  should check these reports  to examine whether there is a lacuna in the 
system  and if the system  is working with reasonable efficiency . It should also be 
seen whether the observations of TIAs in the TIA Register were complied with 
by the stations  concerne d. 
(Ref: Para  No.2008 of IR  Code  for Accts. Dept. -Part II ) 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
264 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.1.8 Claims  
A Claim means a ri ghtful demand from the customer  against the railway  
administration for payment of compensation  for the loss  of consignments . 
Preventive  measures  are to be taken for elimination of claims. Elimination of 
arising of claims is a cooperative effort of all departments  of railways associated 
in the carriage of goods . The following are some of the causes of cl aims:  
Causes of claims  
I) Mis-despatch of goods  
II) Damage  by wet  
III) Breakage  and leakage  
IV) Pilferage  of goods  
V) Over -carriage of goods  
VI) Diversion of goods  
VII) Deterioration due to delay in transit  
VIII) Wrong deliveries  
IX) Fire, explosion and accidents  
X) Unconnected consignments . 
Audit  check would consist of the following:  
I) Any measures  taken by Railw ays for prevention of claims  
II) Whether claims passed were made within the due period, settled within 
the time  limit of settlement  
III) Whether settlement of claims have been exercised within the monetary 
powers of the officers concer ned 
IV) Whether the claims have been passed according to the admissibility as per 
the latest rules . 
[Ref: Chapter III of IR Code  for Traffic  (Commercial ) Department ] Also refer 
Para  No.7.7  
7.1.9 Collection  of Station  Earnings  And A ccountal  
All payment of railway  dues on public  traffic  is required to be made in cash  or 
payment of freight  by bank  drafts, credit  notes, etc. Railways  are also 
encouraging to move to digital  modes for acceptance of payments as well as 
disbursal. The Railway  money collected should be accounted in the respective 
cash books . Entire collection of cash  will be remitted without any delay to the 
cash office/bank /collection agent. A Cash  Remittance  Note (CR Note) is prepared 
to enter all  the details of the cash /vouchers  and submitted to the Cash Office . 
Copy of the CR Note will be forwarded by Cash Office to the station as 
acknowledgement  of receipt . This  copy will be attached to the respective block  
foils of the CR Notes  at the station.  It should also be seen whether the stations  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
265 
For internal use of IA&AD  have switched over preparation of E -CR Notes after the implementation of E -CR 
Note s 
Audit  check should be to *see whether the remittances of the station earnings  are 
made daily and there was no delay in remittance . Reasons for the delay, if any, 
should be verified and taken up with the R ailway  Administration . It should be 
examined to see whether short remittance  of the day’s earnings , if any, was made. 
Such cases should be checked thoroughly to verify the action  taken by 
Administration to realize the entire revenue and punitive action  taken on the staff  
concerned. It should also be seen that acknowledged copies of the CR Notes  are 
received in station without fail.  
7.1.10  Station  Balance  Sheet  
Balance  Sheet  is prepared to show the transactions occurred during the month  in 
a station and show the unrealised  earnings  at the close of the month . The check 
of the Station  Balance Sheet  in Accounts  Office  mainly consists of bringing the 
figures of the various tr affic earnings  into account  with the corresponding figures 
in the connected returns  in which the transactions have been initially brought to 
account  and which are  checked inde pendently.  It should also be seen whether the 
stations  have switched over preparation of E -Balance Sheet after the 
implementation of E -Balance Sheet.  
Table 02 : Goods  Balance  Sheet  
SL. NO.  DEBITS  CREDITS  
1. Opening Balance  
i) Floating Cash  
ii) Cashier ’s debit  
iii) Accounts  office Debits  or 
error  sheet  
a) Admitted  Debits  
b) Objected Debits  
iv) Wharfage  & Demurrage  
Charge  
v) Cost of Govt . Publications  
vi) Inward  to pay  freight  Cash  
 
Vouchers  
2. To Current  Debits  
i) Outward  Paid Goods  Tfc. –
Local  
ii) Outward  Paid Goods  Tfc.-
Foreign  
iii) Inward  To-Pay Tfc.-Local  
iv) Inward  To-Pay Tfc.-Foreign  By Special  Credits  
i) Credit  Advice  Note  
ii) Refund  List 
iii) Remission  Orders  
iv) Debit transferred to 
other stations  
v) Aucti on sales  etc. 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
266 
For internal use of IA&AD  v) Wharfage  & Demurrage  
vi) Wagon  Registration  Fees 
vii) Crane  Charges  
viii) Siding  charges  
3.          To Special  Debits  
i) Floating Cash  
ii) Cashier ’s Debits  
iii) Accounts  Office  debits  or 
error sheet  
a) Admitted  Debit  
b) Objected Debit  
iv) Sundry and miscellaneous  
earning  
v) Government  publications  By Closing Balance  
i) Floating Cash  
ii) Cashier ’s Debit  
iii) Accounts  office 
Debits  or Error  sheet  
a) Admitted  Debits  
b) Objected Debits  
iv) Wharfage  and 
Demurrage  Charges  
v) Cost of Govt . 
Publications  
vi) Inward  to  pay  freight  
 Total  Total  
Basically, Debit side represents the earning of a Station  and the Credit  side 
represents the remittances.  
Checks conducted o n Station  Balance  Sheet  by Accounts  Office  
In the Debits  side, opening balance  is checked with the closing b alance  which is 
shown in the previous month ’s Balance Sheet . Current  debits  are checked with 
reference to various returns  such as Outward  paid cash  book, wharfage  and 
demurrage  statements, wagon  registration  fee statement, etc., Entries for Special  
Debits would be checked with Error  Sheets received, disallowances made by the 
cashier, other miscellaneous  items, if any.  
In the Credit  side, cash  and cash  vouchers  will be checked as per the 
acknowledgement  made by the Chief  Cashier  with the cash  remittance  foil 
received from the cashier. The amount of CR Note is posted in the register  and 
checked with date -wise posting of CR Note in the Balance Sheet . Special  Credits 
are checked with the enclosed documents  such as refund  list, credit  advice note, 
etc., received along with the station Balance sheet in Traffic  Accounts  office. 
Closing balance  must be supported by the statements showing full particulars of 
the amounts yet to be cleared by the Station  Master . 
The totals of the debit  and credit  side of the Station  Balance  Sheet  to be checked 
to see that they are correct and both sides’ totals are equal in amount.  
The result  of the check of the Station  Balance sheet in the Traffic  Accounts  office 
is intimated to the station through advice of internal  check, showing the closing 
balance  as per Sta tion Balance Sheet  and as worked out by the Accounts Office . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
267 
For internal use of IA&AD  Any difference will be issued as Error  Advice  to the Balance Sheet  which should 
be taken in to account  immediately on receipt  by the station of the Advice of the 
Internal  Check . 
Audit  check will also be on the above lines and in case of the outstanding  debits , 
if the debits are outstanding for a longer period, the same should be taken up with 
the Railway  Administration  for early clearance. It is also to be pointed out that if 
objected debits were not cleared for a longer period, those debits should be 
converted as Admitted  Debits  and cleared.  
[Ref: Chapter XXVII of IR  Code  for Accounts  Dept. Part -II and Chapter X 
of IR Code for Traffic  (Commercial ) Dept]. (Chapter 11 - of Financial  Attest  
Audit  Manual  2009 ) 
7.1.11  Miscellaneous  Pay Orders Including Refunds  
In auditing  the above, generally it should be seen that:  
I) Whether each voucher  is original  
II) It should be f or a specific claim and allocation  of the charge should be 
shown clearly  
III) The rules  or authority  for arranging the payment should be looked into in 
each case  
IV) The instructions  for detail ed scrutiny contained in respect of Audit  of 
Vouchers  for payment may be observed  
V) While arranging refunds  of overcharges , waived Demurrage  charges  and 
Whar fage charges  etc., it should be seen whether latest orders were 
adhered to.  
7.1.12  Not Received Cell (NR Cell ) 
The main function of NR Cell  is to trace unconnected wagon /goods  and to 
minimize claims on Railways . NR Cell is established  on Indian  Railway  at 
Railway Board , Zonal  and Divisional  level with the aim to enhance the facilities 
given to rail  customers  after booking  of goods  by Railways. If the goods  are not 
received by the consignee /at the destination  station, consignee or Station  Master  
can contact this cell  on phone. Unconnected wagons  are traced by this cell and 
efforts are made to send them to their correct destination  as early as possible. 
Work  of NR Cell is handled by Commercial  Inspector . Tracers will be sent to 
forwarding stations  as per requirement. If any Goods /wagons  are not traced at the 
end of month  amongst the complaints  received at divisional  level, then a report 
will be prepared and sent to Zonal NR Cell Office  and then from Zonal NR C ell 
to Railway Board  NR cell office.  
 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
268 
For internal use of IA&AD  Audit  check would be to verify the working of the NR Cell . 
I) Whether the received complaints  were registered correctly and action  was 
initiat ed to trace the un -connected wagons  early to avoid passing of claims  
II) Whether returns  were submitted to Zonal  and further to Railway  Board  
office in case of pending  list of the complaints .  
III) Whether the assistance of FOIS was utilised for tracing/connecting the 
unconnected wagons by NR Cell.  
7.1.13  Apportionment  of Earnings  (Goods  and Coaching ) 
Apportionment  of Earnings means passing on the share of earnings  to those 
Railways  who have carried the traffic  including Parcel  traffic  booked for 
transportation and movement of Passenger  Traffic . Sometimes that railway  may 
be neither originating nor terminating the traffic  but carries the same over its 
system . Provisions contained from Para 3218 to Para 3224 of Indian  Railway  
Code  for Accou nts Department  envisages the rules  of apportionment . The 
centralised apportionment process is done by RITES . 
The basic principle followed in the apportionment  of earning is based on distance 
travelled by the passenger  and distance/route  carried in respect of goods  traffic . 
In the case of traffic  interchanged  between the Zonal  Railways , the adjustment of 
Goods , Passengers  and ‘Paid’ Parcels  traffic  devolves on the forwarding railway  
while the ad justment of ‘To -Pay’ Parcels traffic  devolves on the receiving 
railway . No adjustment is made in respect of Excess Fare , Luggage , Animals and 
Birds etc. traffic  and su ch earnings  would be retained wholly by the collecting 
railway . Sundry earnings  are retained by the home  Railway  as the same is not 
apportionable.  
Centralised Apportionment  System  provides the apportionment  of earnings  of 
each Zonal  Railway  which helps to judge the performance  of the respective Zone. 
Parti culars of the apportioned  earnings  are forwarded by Railway Board  to the 
concerned Zonal Railways  without any detailed records for accounting purpose.  
However, in the absence of th e detailed records for verification  at the Zonal  
Railway  level, Audit  check on apportionment  of earnings  should be conducted at 
Railway Board  level.  
7.2 Coaching  Activities  
Notification of the passenger  fares , fares  for season ticket, fares  for 
Rajdhani /Shatabdi /Jan Shatabdi/Garibrath/Duronto or any other new  train 
service , differential fare  for peak/non -peak season, other surcharges would be 
issued by Railway  Board  which are being u pdated in the system  applications . 
Orders/Circulars  on tariff rules  for IRCTC , charges  for special  train/coaches , 
different ty pes of concessions  applicable to passengers , policy  on coaching  
refunds  would be circulated by Railway Board  to the Zonal  Railways . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
269 
For internal use of IA&AD  Audit  at Railway  Board  and Zonal  Level are to be conducted on the lines 
mentioned at Para  7.1 above.  
Further Audit  checks  to be conducted at  Field level are detailed below:  
7.2.1  Sanctions  
Please refer Para  7.1.1  above.  
7.2.2  Unreserved  Ticketing System  (UTS ) And Passenger  Reservation  System 
(PRS ) 
Under  UTS  and PRS , many reports  for different periods could be generated i.e. 
Daily , Periodical , Monthl y and Statistical Reports. Balance  Sheet  is prepared at 
the end of the month . However, print outs of only a few of the Reports (shown 
below) are generated.  
I) Statement on Summary of transact ion (Cash  information Report ): 
This will show the total cash  transaction. In UTS , details of transactions 
of ATVM , COTVM, JTBS , etc., are also included.  
II) Statement M9  – Classification -Passenger  Classification:  This will 
show the Local , Foreign  Tickets , Season Tic kets for Quarterly, half -
yearly  periods  etc. 
III) Statement -Suburban  Passenger  Classification : This will show the 
number of tickets  sold in the suburban section . 
IV) Statement -Ticket Information : Total number of tickets  issued including 
NI tickets, refunds  made, etc., is available in the report.  
V) Statement -M-17 Continuity : This will give details about the continuity 
of the ticket rolls used/in use. Audit  should chec k if ticket rolls are taken 
for use in the number of sequence and rolls, if any, left -out in between 
should be used first before taking the other rolls.  
VI) Statement of Non -Issued Tickets (NI Tickets): List of tickets  that are 
made as ‘Non -Issued is shown in this statement. It should be checked to 
see whether each entry is supported by the ticket received. It should be 
seen that the tickets themselves have been marked ‘Non -Issued’ and 
endorsed over the signature  of the competent  authority . Audit  should 
point out for bringing down the cases of ‘Non -Issued’ tickets.  
(Ref: Para  No.2108 of IR  Code  for Accounts  Department -Part II ). 
VII) Statement -Summary of Cancelled Tickets : Mainly it should be 
checked to se e whether the originally cancelled ticket is available with the 
copy of cancelled ticket.  
VIII) Statement - Summary of Special  Cancelled Tickets:  Special 
cancellation  would be made with the permission of the Supervisor  due to 
reason such as printing of wrong date, wrong class, wrong train number, 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
270 
For internal use of IA&AD  wrong gender, wrong concession, etc. Audit  should point out to reduce 
the number of Special Cancelled tickets . 
IX) Statement -TTE  Money Receipts : Remittances  made by TTE on date 
would be listed out in this statement.  
X) Statement -TC Money Receipts : Remittances  made by TC on date would 
be listed out i n this statement.  
XI) Statement of Concession (Con. Passenger ):Various Concessions  viz., 
Senior  Citizen, Handicapped, Cancer , Heart Patients, Students, Sports  
Persons, etc., are  allowed to the passengers . Generally, it would be seen 
that the concession order or voucher  is issued by the authority  competent  
to issue  it. It should also bear the stam p of the office of the issue  and it is 
valid as on date with regard to date of issue . 
XII) Daily  Statement of Sundries and other earning . 
XIII) Statement on Bank  Card  tickets . 
XIV)  Stateme nt of UPI  transactions.  
XV) Statement of Refunds:  Refunds made on cancellation  of tickets  for the 
day is shown in the statement.  
Audit  should check the above points  while reviewing the cases of con cession 
to verify whether correct rate  of concession was allowed based on the type of 
concession eligible/requested.  
With the computerisation of Traffic  Accounts , the scope  of audit , so far, as it 
relates to arithmetical  accuracy  of the compiled accounts , is limited. More 
emphasis has to be laid  on the check of initial records and station accounts , which 
form the nucleus for input of the whole data.  
7.2.3  Parcel  Management  System  
Periodical  revision  of rates for parcel /luggage  and other c oaching  traffic  will be 
made and circulated by Railway  Board . All policy  matters with regard to luggage, 
introduction of rationalisation scheme for booking  and carriage of parcel  traffic , 
special  scheme for development  of parcel  traffic , policy on leasing  of parcel  space 
in the br ake vans and parcel  vans etc., are circulated to zonal railways for 
implementation . 
Luggages  
Passengers  are allowed to carry limited luggage  with them free  of charge (free  
allowance). If the total weight  of the luggage is more than the free  allowance, the 
excess weight is charged at 1.5 times the luggage rates (Scale -L). If the luggage 
is more than the  maximum  limit, it should be booked in Break Van. Luggage  are 
booked according to the extant  rules  in vogue.  
While checking the luggage  bills, it should be seen whet her the charges  have been 
collected correctly after allowing the applicable free  allowance. Also it should be 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
271 
For internal use of IA&AD  checked to see whether the rate  has been adopted according to the distance 
involved of the pair of point s of journey.  
 Parcels  
Parcels  are tendered for booking  accompanied by a forwarding note which will 
be attached to the station copy of the Parcel  Way bill. Some of the articles  that 
are not accepted as parcels  are: 
I) Offensive articles  and wet skins (other than wet skins of wild animals 
securely packed in airtight containers).  
II) Acids and Corrosives.  
III) Dangerous & explosive goods . 
Parcels  are to be weighed  in the presence of the consignor and charged on actual 
weight  or by derived on measurement , whichever is more. In case of some 
articles , the weight is ch arged on fixed  weight system . Both the charged weight 
and actual weight should be shown on the Parcel  Way Bill . Parcels are charged 
as per the scale applicable for the train by which they are carried . And the 
classifications are of 3 types i.e. 1) Rajdhani  ‘R’ 2) Premier Parcel ‘P’ and 3) 
Standard  Parcel service  – ‘S’. 
The following checks  are to be exercised while checking the parcel  way bills : 
I) Full description of the consignment is furnished.  
II) It should be seen whether the rate  is charged as per the latest Parcel  Rate 
Circulars . 
III) Distance has been shown correc tly with the selection of the route . 
IV) If booked on concession, the details of the concession are quoted.  
V) Corrections are not to be made in the Parcel  Way Bill . If done, attestation 
is mandatory.  
VI) If the value of the consignment is declared, assessment  of PCEV 
(Percentage charges  on excess value) charge of excess value is calculated 
correctly and collected.  
VII) Perishable  traffic  should be given preferen ce over other parcels  traffic  for 
loading . 
VIII) Surprise checks  are to be carried out to examine the contents to detect any 
mis-declaration  of goods  by the send er.  
Audit  scrutiny may also involve the following:  
In many of the stations , Parcel  Management  System  (PMS ) is not fully 
implemented and the Parcel Way Bills  are prepared manually. At these stations, 
in additions to above checks , it has to verified to see the details of the indents , 
register  of the stock  of money value book to verify the acco untal of books  
received, books  taken for use, etc. In case of Inward  Parcel Way Bills, receiving 
stations are responsible for recovery of undercharges. Over  carried parcels  are to 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
272 
For internal use of IA&AD  be booked back to the correct destination . Demurrage  and wharfage  returns  are 
to be checked for any mis -calculation and to also point out recovery, if any, of 
undercharges noticed.  
Audit  check on leasing  of parcel  space in the brake vans and parcel  vans, etc. are 
dealt at Para  No.7.3.  
(Ref: Chapter No. IX of IRCM  Vol. I ) 
7.2.4  Provision  of ATVM , CO -TVM, YTSK , JTBS , HALT, IPPRS , ETC.  
Automatic  Ticket Vending  Machine  (ATVMs ) were provided at the stations  to 
ease the pressure on the Railway  counters. O ne can purchase  First and Second 
Class single, return tickets , platform tickets & renew season tickets for adult & 
child . Smart Card  is used to purchase  tickets through ATVM . Smart Card  can be 
purchased at booking  offices at stat ions and recharged as per requirements. 
Commuters get extra value on every recharge as prescribed  from time  to time . 
A facilitator is appointed for working on the ATVM  who will be given a smart 
card for issuing the tickets . He has to also educate and encourage the commuters 
for using their own smart cards . On every recharge of Smart card, bonus  value  as 
prescribed  from time  to time . is credited  in Smart Card . Transactions at ATVM 
will be reflected in the station’s (where the ATVMS are located) summary of 
transactions.  
Cash , Coin And Smart Card  Operated (VERSATILE) Ticket Vending  
Machine  (Co-TVM ) 
I) The Co -TVMs  are versatile ATVM  machines . In addition to smart cards  
Co-TVMs can issue  tickets  on currency  notes  and coins. Issue  of Smart 
Cards and its recharge is also available on Co -TVM  machines . 
II) Following tickets  will be issued through Co -TVM : 
a) Second class single journey and return journey child /adult tickets . Per 
ticket maximum  4 passengers  
b) First class single journey and return journey. Per ticket ma ximum  one 
passenger  
c) Platform Ticket (Maximum 1 passenger ) 
d) Season Ticket (Maximum 1 passenger ). 
III) Concessional tickets  will not be issued  
IV) Co-TVM  is connected with UTS  server  
V) Co-TVM  is operated by passenger  
VI) Ticket will be issued by Indian  currency  notes  and coin or Smart card  
VII) Co-TVM  will accept o nly Rs. 5/ -, Rs. 10/ - coins and Rs. 5/ - to Rs. 100/- 
Indian  currency  notes  of Gandhi series  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
273 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) Every day at 00:00 Hrs. DTC will be printed  and cash  will be taken out 
by commercial  supervisor in presence of RPF  
IX) Passengers  will be benefited with bonus  amount  as prescribed  from time  
to time . 
Yatri  Ticket Suvidha  Kendra (YTSK ): Authorized ticketing agents appointed 
by Railways  would be invited for establishment & operation  of Computerized 
Passenger  Reservation  System  (PRS ) cum Unreserved  Ticket System (UTS ) 
terminals . The cost  of establishing, operating, and maintaining and periodic 
system  up-gradation of hardware/software  required at such reservation  centres 
shall be borne by the licensee. The terminals, PCs, ticket printers, Modems and 
multiplexers etc. as per prescribed  specifications  have to be procur ed by the 
licensee themselves and nominated officers of Railway  will inspect the Hardware  
for certification . The equipment ’s purchased by the licensee will be maintained 
by the licens ee only. The licensee will hire and maintain two numbers of 
data/communication  channels be tween his location and the nearest computerized  
PRS/UTS centre of the Railways on payment of System Access  Charge . He will 
receive service  charge (commission) for his service  rendered.  It should be seen 
whether the licencee remits the daily transactions to the Railway Account on the 
next working day without delay.  
Jan Sadharan  Ticket Booking  Sevak (JTBS ):With a view to facilitating issuing 
of unreserved tickets  outside railway  premises, a scheme of JTBS has been 
introduced. Under  the JTBS scheme, JTBS have been provided counters outside 
the station wherein the passengers  can purchase  unreserved tickets on payment 
of Rs.  2/- extra per passenger . JTBS are also allowed to r enew the season tickets 
and will get Rs.5/ per passenger  as service  charges . All transactional data of JTBS 
is captured and included in the transactions of the respective stations . 
Halt  Station : In cases where a justification  to open a flag  station is not available, 
a Halt station is opened as a Passenger  amenity which will be run  by a Halt Agent. 
In opening a New  Halt, a Railway  Administration  must be satisfied that the 
provision of the halt will not involve the railway  in leakage of revenue on account  
of ticketles s travel. Commission  will be paid to the Halt Agent as per the latest 
orders in force. The question of closing down where the average  number of 
passengers  utilising it is less than 10  per day or whose retention is otherwise not 
found justified, should also be considered. The reports  of the halt station are 
generated at the serving station of the halt.  
Indian  Post Passenger  Reservation  System  (IPPRS ) 
Services  of India  Post Passenger  Reservation  System  (IPPRS ) facility at the Post 
Offices was introduced by Railway  for the convenience of local  public . 
Passengers  can book their reserved accommodation train tickets  in advance at 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
274 
For internal use of IA&AD  these IPPR S Counters by any train from any station to any station over Indian  
Railways .  
Audit  examination may involve the following:  
As the transactional reports  are generated at the station/PRS /UTS  centres, the 
checks  applicable for  UTS/PRS centres are to be adopted for checking the reports. 
Details of the commission/service  charges  paid have to be reviewed to check 
whether the  payment has been made as per the latest circulars . It may also be seen 
whether the Administration  is having a close watch on the commercial  viability 
of continuation of the Halt  stations and if not, Audit  may point out for taking a 
decision as necessary. This applies to the continuation of services of IPPRS  also. 
Audit  may also examine whether these services were extended afte r due 
justification  and all the conditions prescribed  were met. It may also be seen that 
whether periodical  review is conducted to examine whether continuation of these 
services are justified.  
7.2.5 Special  Trains/Coaches  
Applications  for running  of a Special  train or booking  of coaches  for private  
journey would be pl aced by the parties and the Railway  receiving the application  
for running  of a Special train over more than one railway  will coordinate with 
other railways concerned for finalising the tou r programme . Charges for the 
Special train/coach  would be advised to the party for remitting the amount in 
advance along with security  deposit . On completion  of the journey s before 
releasing the deposit over -charges /under -charges  would be assessed based on the 
running particulars and recovered wherever necessary. The rules , rates and 
conditions for booking  of Spec ial train/coaches  is as per the latest orders/circulars  
as given in the IRCA  coaching  tariff.  
In audit  check, the detailed tour programme  of Special  Train  and other documents  
of the case would be reviewed to see whether all the charges  (due charges  as per 
the type of train/coach , Detention  charges  involved, recovery with reference to 
any loss  of items, etc.) are recovered as per the latest rules  and regulations . 
(Refer Para  Nos. 656 -661 of IRCM Vol.I ) 
7.2.6  Warrants  And Police  Vouchers  
Military persons and police personnel are issued warrants/vouche rs for 
performing journey over Indian  Railway . Before issue  of tickets  the following 
checks  would be made:  
I) Whether the entries in the warrant are complete in all r espect including 
signature  of the officer issuing the warrant.  
II) The warrant bears the stamp of the issuing office.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
275 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Number of persons, weight  of baggage, actual accommodation provided 
has been entered.  
The warrants/vouchers  are collected and the tickets  are issued. The collected 
vouchers  are sent along with daily CR Note to Accounts  Office  for realisation of 
railway  dues. Amount d ue towards warrants/Police  vouchers  are listed out and 
forwarded to the respective Military and other offices for reimbursement . 
Audit  has to verify whether warrants were complete with all  the details while 
issuing the tickets  and eligible accommodation has only been made available. 
Audit while checking the correctness of the statement prepared for realisation of 
the amount, would also verify the receipt  of p ending  dues towards 
warrants/vouchers . It should also be seen that the Service  Charges  for the services 
offered to be collected from the department have been recovered.  
(Ref: Chapter IV IRCM Vol. I)  
7.2.7  Postal  Haulage  Bills  
Postal  traffic  would be carrie d in postal  vans and non -postal  vans and the haulage  
charges  would be revised annually by Railway  Board . The haulage  charges  are 
determined on ‘berth displacement ‘method. In case of non -postal  vans, billing 
and payment should be done from the originating station of the train to the station 
at which the mails are unloaded. In case of postal  vans, b illing and payment will 
be done for the entire distance the postal  vans travel, i.e. from the point of 
attachment to point of detachment of such postal  vans. Charges will be levied for 
the services actually provided, and billi ng will be done on actual services 
provided by the Railways  to the Department  of Posts . Separate  charges  are 
applicable per berth per kilometre for different distance slabs.  Point to point 
charges  has to be rounded to the next multiple of five rupees.  
While checking the postal  bills, the following points are to be kept in mind:  
I) It has to be verified whether the charges  are assessed as per the latest 
revised haulage  charges  with point to point charges  rounded off to the 
next multiple of five.  
II) Number of days of the month  is correctly taken in to account . 
III) If the Railways  have inducted coaches  with higher number of berths, 
whether billing has been done for such higher number of berths or part 
thereof.  
IV) Whether all the dues are received in time . 
[Ref: Chapter XVI of IR  Code  for Traffic  (Commercial ) Department  and Para  
Nos 1201 to 1215 of IRCM Vol -I 
7.2.8  Travelling  Inspector  of Ac counts  (TIA) Reports  
Please Refer Para  No. 7.1.7.  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
276 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.2.9  Claims  
Please Refer Para  No.7.1.8.  
7.2.10  Collection  of Station  Earnings  And Accountal  
Please Refer Para  No.7.1.9.  
7.2.11  Station  Balance  Sheet  
Table 03: Coaching  Balance  Sheet  
SRL.  DEBITS  CREDITS  
1 To Opening Balance  
i) Floating cash  
ii) Cashiers Debit  
iii) Accounts  office debits  or error  
sheet  
a) Admitted  Debits  
b) Not Admitted  Debit  
iv) Wharfage  and Demurrage  charges  
v) Govt . Publications  Cash  and cash  vouchers  
2 To Current  Debits  
i) Passenger  Traffic  (PCT) -L 
ii) Passenger  Traffic  (PCT) -F 
iii) Passenger  Traffic  (BPT) -L 
iv) Passenger  Traffic  (BPT) -F 
v) Luggage , Animals &Birds Excess 
fare 
vi) Excess fare  
vii) TTE Cash  
viii) Cloakroom  charges  
ix) Parcel  Traffic -L 
x) Parcel  Traffic -F 
xi) Wharfage  and Demurrage  Charges  By Special  Credits  
i) Cr.Advice  Notes  
ii) Refund  list 
iii) Deduction list  
iv) Remission  Orders  
v) Dr. Transferred to Other Stn  
vi) Transfer  to LPO  
vii) Re-Booking  
viii) Special  recoveries  
 
3 To Special  Debits  
i) Floating Cash  
ii) Cashiers Debits   
iii) Accounts  Office  debit  or error  
sheet  
a) Admitted  debits  
b) Not Admitted  debits  
iv) Sundry and Miscellaneous  earning  
v) Government  Publications  By Closing Balance (Station  
outstanding ) 
i) Floating cash  
ii) Cashi ers Debit  
iii) Accounts  office debits  or 
error  sheet  
a)Admitted  Debits  
b)Not Admitted  Debit  
iv) Wharfage  and Demurrage  
charges  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
277 
For internal use of IA&AD  Detailed  checks  on the coaching  balance  sheet would be on the lines of checking 
Goods  Balance sheet.  
(Chapter 11 - of Financial  Attest  Audit  Manual  2009 ) 
7.2.12  Miscellaneous  Pay Orders Including Refunds  
Pay orders prepared for arranging payment to the claimant, refunds  on cancelled 
tickets  by individual parties as well as IRCTC , cateri ng bills  submitted by IRCTC 
enclosing the detailed statements, etc. would be checked in audit  as under.  
Miscellaneous  Pay Order  
I) In scrutinising the miscellaneous  pay orders, the rules  or authority  for 
arranging the payment should be looked into in each case.  
II) The instructions  for detailed scrutiny contained in respect of Audit  of 
Vouchers  for payment may be observed.  
Refunds o n Cancelled Tickets  
Tickets would be cancelled by the passengers  for various reasons and the refund  
amount would depend mainly on the time  of canc ellation . If the tickets  are not 
presented at the reservation  counter within the given time  (including the online  
tickets which could not be cancelled), the passenger  has to submit the ticket and 
obtain a Ticket Deposit  Receipt  (TDR ) either from commercial  department or on 
online. An application  has to be submitted enclosing  the TDR for receiving the 
refund.  
Audit  check would involve verifying whether latest refund  rules  with due 
formalities were adhered to, while arranging refunds . It may also to be verified 
whether the application  is enclosed with original ticket submitted for cancellation  
and a valid TDR . 
Catering  Bills  Submitted By IRCTC  
The checks  condu cted for miscellaneous  vouchers  as above are  adopted. Due 
accompaniments submitted have to be thoroughly checked to verify the 
correctness of the calculation shown in the bills  submitted by IRCTC . 
7.3 Licensing /Leasing  of Railway  Land  
Circulars  pertaining to licensing  of Railway  land as commercial  plots for stacking 
purposes, installation of weigh bridges  etc., including issues related to realisation 
of rent  for the land  leased  for commercial  purposes, would be issued by Railw ay 
Board  periodically.  
I) Licensing  of Railway  Land  for Commercial  Plots for stacking at Stations  
II) Licensing  of Railway  Land  for CONCOR  Depots  v) Govt . Publications  
 Total  Total  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
278 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Leasing  of Space for Bank  ATMs at Stations/Platforms  
IV) Licensing  of Railway  Land  for parking of 2 -Wheeler/4 -Wheelers at 
stations  
V) Licensing  of stalls at platforms  and station buildings  
VI) Leasing  of Space in SLR /SLRD  
VII) Leasing  of all types of Parcel  Van 
VIII) Commercial  advertisements  in stations . 
Railway  administration will call for tenders  for finalising contracts  in respect of 
the above cases and the  audit  check of the leasing  and advertisement contracts  
will be as under:  
I) Proper  arrangements exist for giving due publicity for tenders  invited and 
the response is quite good . 
II) When the response for tenders  is poor, the reasons should be examined 
critically . 
III) The tenders  contain sufficient details and information relevant to the 
work . 
IV) The Tenders  are invited with suffici ent tender  notice period (as prescribed  
by Railway  Board  from time  to time ) facilitating the bidders participating 
in more numbers to obtain competitive price s. 
V) The floating of tenders  is approved  by the competent  authority  as per the 
reserve price . 
VI) The extension of opening of tenders , if any, is justified on record and the 
reasons for the same to be checked . 
VII) The tenders  are opened at the prescribed  date, time  and place by the 
officers nominated for this purpose in the presence of Accounts  
representative and the in tending tenderers . 
VIII) The tenders  are submitted along with the prescribed  Security  Deposit  as 
notified by the Railway  board . 
IX) The offers obtained are tabulated and authenticate d by an appropriate  
authority  and scrutinised by the Accounts  Officer . 
X) The offers are discussed in the Tender  Committee  (TC) constituted by the 
authority  competent  to accept the tenders . 
XI) The highest bid is accepted if otherwise found correct in all respects . 
XII) There is no undue  delay in finalisation of tenders  and communication  of 
its acceptance to the tenderer . 
XIII) The contractor has registered himself with the state labour  board and the 
certificate  of registration  has been submitted . 
XIV)  No important changes are  made in the form of standard contract  
documents  or new  types of contract  documents  used. 
XV) The successful bidder  should start service  (lease of space in SLR /SLRD , 
lease of parcel  van etc.) within 30 days from the date of receipt  of the 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
279 
For internal use of IA&AD  Acceptance Letter. If the successful bidder fails to start loading  within the 
stipulated per iod due to any reason, the “Earnest Money ” of such bidder 
has to be forfeited. If the lease operator fails to operate the contract  during 
the contractual period due to any reason without giving prior notice, the 
“Secu rity Deposit /Performance  Guarantee ‟ should be forfeited . 
XVI)  Audit  has to check whether action  on the above lines has been taken 
including punitive action  like blacklisting the contractor, if any and 
whether the decision of blacklisting was circulated to other Railways . 
XVII)  Whether the loading  was allowed after lumpsum  leased  freight  was paid 
in advance . 
XVIII)  Whether checks  have been made by the administration to see the loading  
has been done as per the ’Manifest’ . 
XIX)  Whether the imposed Fines, wharfage , demurrage  and punitive charges  
for overloading, re -weighment  charges , detention  charges  etc, were 
recovered from the party or adjusted with the Security  Deposit  (Security 
Deposit has to be reimbursed with the extent of amount debited , within 
15 days period) . 
XX) If any recovery against any contract  has been pointed out by Audit , 
Vigilance  or int ernal  check, it has to be checked whether the SD  was 
released after making such recovery.  
XXI)  It should also be seen whether Brake Vans/Parcel Vans are attached  
promptly on such trains, which is leased. In case of non -attachment, t he 
reasons for same has to be reviewed.  
Audit  should verify whether recoveries  of dues towards License Fee are as per 
the Contract  conditions. Also, it should be verified if any periodical  revisions 
have been carried out and recovered by the Administration  to see that no dues are 
outstanding . 
7.4 Lost Property  Office  (LPO ) 
Un-booked articles  or lost  property  found in the railway  vehicles or railway  
premises would be stored in the Lost Property  Office  and efforts would be made 
to restore suc h articles  to the respective owners.  
Audit  check of the records of LPO  would be to verify:  
I) Every effort is made to locate the rightful owners and to handing over the 
articles  
II) Whether any dues towa rds railway  are recovered before handing over the 
articles  to owners  
III) Whether Perishable  articles  are auctioned early  
IV) Auctions are held at regular interval to clear the articles  at LPO  
V) Whether reserve price is fixed  correctly  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
280 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) While disposing, whether due care has been taken to observe any ban or 
restriction imposed on the sale of any particular commodity . 
[Ref: Para  nos.340 -343 of IR  Code  for Traffic  (Commercial ) Dept. ] 
7.5 Traffic  Suspense  Account  
Traffic  Suspense  Account  is an account  operated for the purpose of recording the 
revenue earnings  on accrua l basis in a month ’s account  to which they pertain and 
also for watching the progress of their realization. The outstanding  balance  
represents unrealized earnings  and is exhibited on the Asset  Side in the Balance 
Sheet . 
Traffic  Suspense  consists of Station  Out standings –i) Coaching  and ii) Goods , 
and Traffic Account  Office  (TAO) Outstanding , Cash -in-transit, Demands  
Recoverable  and others.  
Every debit  raised by the Traffic  Accounts  office on the station on account  of 
error  in charging fare  or freight , short remittance  of cash , etc., accepted by the 
station is k nown as Admitted  Debits . They should be cleared immediately by 
effecting recoveries  or writing off the outstanding  amount, if irrecoverable.  
Every debit  raised by the Traf fic Accounts  office on the station on account  of 
error  in charging fare  or freight , short remittance  of cash  etc., but not accept ed by 
the station and kept pending  for want of clearance through withdrawal , is known 
as ‘Objected Debit’. Commercial  Manual  of Indian  Railways  stipulates that in 
case of disputed debits  matter should be pursued with the Traffic Accounts 
Branch . Objected debits subsequently found to be correct to be transferred to 
Admitted  debits. The objected debits are cleared either by withdrawal or 
transferring to Admitted Debits . 
Demands  Recoverable  is a suspense  head  operated to bring into the books  of 
Accounts  on accrual  basis of all the dues to the Railways  within the same 
financial  year which were not realized during the year. The closing balance  under 
this head  represent unre alized amount in the form of outstanding  Demands 
Recoverable  which will be exhibited on Assets  side of the Balance Sheet  of Indian  
Railways . 
Reasons attributable for the out -standings are:  
I) Absence of taking timely action  makes the outstanding  old which become 
hard core items  
II) Non-availability of records pertaining to old items  
III) Disputes lead ing to court  cases  
IV) Staff  retiring/death cases thus leading to difficulties in recovery  
During the Audit  review of Suspense  balance  of Traffic  Accounts , the following 
should be examined:  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
281 
For internal use of IA&AD  I) Whether records were preserved correctly and action  was taken to realise 
the outstanding  
II) In case of Admitted  Debits  of staff , whether rec overy was commenced 
and in case of retirements ‘No Due Certificate ’ was obtained from Traffic  
Accounts  Branch  before releasing the retirement  benefits.  
III) Whether efforts w ere made to recover from settlement dues/relief  of 
pension.  
IV) Whether court  cases were monitored at appropriate  level.  
(Ref: Para  2751 -52 of Indian  Railways  Code  for Accounts  Department  Volume  
II and Para 612 of Indian Railways  Code for Accounts Department Volume I ) 
7.6 Policy  On Accident  Claims  And Other Claims  
The principal rules  and procedures for preferment and settlement of claims in 
respect of the booked goods  would be framed  by Railway  Board  and accordingly 
claims would be dealt with. Accident  claim compensation  would be dealt as per 
Sec 124 and 124 -A of Railway Act . 
Audit  check on the claims cases would involve the following:  
I) Whether adequate and effective measures  have been taken by Railway  for 
prevention of claims  
II) Whether occurrence of cases was due to breaches  of procedura l rules  and 
various irregularities  committed by the staff  
III) Whether adequate measures  were taken to connect the unconnected 
packages lying at stations  
IV) Whether unconnected wa gon load consignments  were traced ‘backwards’ 
to determine their correct destination  
V) Whether the particulars of all valuable unconnected consignments  lying 
on hand  was exchanged with other railways to enable for connecting the 
consignments  
VI) Whether the claims were expeditiously disposed within the period 
specified under the rules  
VII) Whether time -barred claim have been processe d by Railways . 
In case the claimant  is not satisfied with the relief  provided by the Railways , 
he can seek legal  remed y through the Railway  Claims  Tribunal  (RCT ). 
I) Railway  Claims  Tribunal  was estab lished  under Section  3 of Railway 
Claims Tribunal Act , 1987  
II) It consists of one Chairman , four Vice -chairma n and some member of 
judicial and technical  members decided by Central  Government  
III) The Jurisdiction, powers and authority  of the claims Tribunal  shall be 
exercised by th e benches there of  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
282 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Chairman  must be or has been a judge of High  Court  or he has worked at 
least for two years as Vice Chairman . Vice -Chairman must be or has been 
a Judge of High Court or has  worked for at least five years on a Civil  
Judicial post  
V) Chairman  Vice -Chairman and every other member shall be appointed by 
the President  
VI) The Chairman  shall be appointed only a fter consultation with the Chief  
Justice of India  
VII) RCT  shall deal with following cases  
Type of case  Time limit for 
filling case  
Claims  against Railway  Administration  for loss , 
damage , deterioration or non -delivery of consignment  Within 3 years  
Compensation  in respect of death/injury to passengers  
arising out of train accidents  under section  124/124A 
of Railway  Act 1989  Within 1 year  
Refund  of fare  and freight  Within 3 years.  
 
a) In each bench a Presenting Officer  in JA Grade  with assistance of Law   
b) Superintendent and Law  Assistant  are posted to present cases on 
behalf of Railway . 
c) RCT  shall have the power  of a Civil  Court . 
d) An appeal against decision of RCT  can be made to High  Court  having 
jurisdiction  over the place where bench is located within 90 days.  
The claimant can file  case at any place. There may be chances that the claimant 
would file  a case under Sec. 124 of the Act  in two different benches of the 
Railway  Claims  Tribunal  defended by two different Railways . In order to avoid 
misuse of the provisions of Rule  8, the railways should adopt the following 
procedure for defending th e claims of train accident /untoward incidents before 
the Tribunal:  
I) If a case under Section  124 or 124 -A of the Railways  Act, 1989  has been 
registered at a bench other than the bench under whose territorial 
jurisdiction  the accident  or untoward incident has taken place, it is to be 
checked whether the claimant has ma de the railway  having jurisdiction  
over the site of accident /untoward incident a party as a respondent or not. 
If not, the railway  receiving the notice of the application  will call for 
record from the railway  where the accident /untoward incident have 
happened. In this way the concerned railway  will take notice that a case 
has been filed in the bench other than the bench which has the territorial 
jurisdiction  over the site of accident /untoward incident.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
283 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) The concerned railway  i.e., the railway  having jurisdiction  over the place 
of acc ident /untoward incident should keep a record of all cases pertaining 
to same victim, filed in different benches of RCT  and to ensure that only 
one case is contested. All other cases should be got dismissed by filing 
Written Sta tements that an application  in respect of the same person has 
already been filed in other bench.  
III) When an award  is pronounced by any bench of the Tribunal , the payment 
may be arranged by the defending railw ay under intimation to the other 
railways under whose jurisdiction , the railway  accident /untoward incident 
has occurred.  
Audit  check on finalized  cases would emphasise on t he procedural aspects as per 
the RCT  act. 
[Ref. Chapter III & IV of IR  code for Traffic  (Commerc ial) Department  and 
Chapter XXXI of IRCM Vol -II] 
7.7 Provision  of Passenger  Amenities  
Division  Commercial  authorities  will have to provide passenger  amenities  which 
include Waiting  Room, Retiring  Room, Licensed Porters, Wheel  chairs & 
stretchers, Battery Operated Car , First Aid Boxes,  High level platform  etc. 
Audit  check would be to verify whether due provision was made and wherever 
complaint s regarding the services were received, were attended to by the 
Administration . 
7.7.1 Improvement/Up Gradation of Passenger  Amenities  
Based on the proposals made by the zonal railways,  Railway  Board  sanctions  
provision of specific amenities  such as lifts, escalators, foot over  bridges , etc. 
Also works  of improvements  on basic amenities  or infrastructural facilities are 
sanctioned  by the Board . 
Audit  has to verify the records pertaining to the sanctions  by the Board  to chec k 
whether action  has been initiated to provide the facilities as per the sanctions  
accorded.  
7.8 Improving Infrastructure  Involving Customer Service  
To involve customers  and invite private  investments in the improvement of 
infrastructure , Railway  Board  introduced schemes like Own Your Wagon  
Scheme , Wagon Investment  Scheme , Liberalised Wagon Investment scheme, 
Special  Freight  Train  Operator Scheme , Auto Freight Train Operator Scheme , 
etc. To provide better service  through total logistics solution to Rail  users and to 
attract additional  traffic  and revenue to Railways , Railway  is developing 
warehousing  complexes.  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
284 
For internal use of IA&AD  Audit  has to examine whether due publicity has been given and the new  schemes 
have been introduced without any delay. Also, Audit should verify if all clauses 
of the new  schemes have been incorporated correctly and benefit extended to the 
customers  without any loss  of revenue to Railways . Whether continuing with the 
scheme will help in gaining traffic  and extra revenue may also be checked.  
7.9 Public  Grievance : Centralised Public Grievances  Redress and Monitoring  
System  (CPGRAMS ) 
Policies are framed  regarding functioning of Public  Grievance  Redressal  
machinery on the railways. Annual  plan and Quarterly progress report will be 
prepared as per Department  of Ad ministrative  Reforms and Public Grievances  
(DOAR&PG ) Directorate . 
All complaints /suggestions received from the rail  users, whether those recorded 
in the complaints  books , or those brought to notice in person through tapals, or 
complaints  lodged through the railway  website are to be taken care of and replies 
sent to the complainants after  analyzing the issues carefully within 15 days.  
CPGRAMS  is developed by DOAR & PG  with the technical  support  of National  
Informatics  Centre  (NIC). It is a single window system  and references  are being 
received through website ( https://www.pgportal.gov.in/ ) from the Directorate  of 
Public  Grievances  (DPG), Department  of Administrative  Reforms and Public 
Grievances (DOAR&PG), Prime  Minister ’s Office  (PMO ) and the President  
Secretariat, which are sent to the concerned Department/Divisions  to advise them 
to upload the remarks and the same will be sent to Railway  Board  for further 
disposal . Grievances received from Pensioners through website 
(https://pensionersportal.gov.in ) from Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ 
Welfare  (DOP&PW) also are taken care of and rep lies are uploaded.  
Audit  may verify the correspondence available with respect to the complaints  and 
action  taken on those complaints . Inaction on the complaints  received may be 
deliberated upon with the Administration . 
7.10 Right  To Information  (RTI ) Cell  
RTI Cells are operated at Railway  Board , Zonal  Railways , PSUs , etc. References 
under RTI are received, registered and are replied to.  
RTI Cell records are verified to check whether replies to the applications  are 
furnished as per the p rovisions of the RTI Act , within due time , to avoid legal  
complications.  
7.11 Dissemination of Railway  Board  Circulars  And Orders  
At this juncture all the circulars /orders are available online . However, where 
Railway  Board  has delegated powers to the Zonal  Railways  to change or revise 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
285 
For internal use of IA&AD  the circular /orde rs, the same should reach all the officers/staff  concerned for 
adaptation.  
Audit  would examine whether the circulars /orders were circulated without delay, 
i.e., in advance of the dates from which those are effe ctive.  
7.12 Justification  For Introduction Of New  Trains  
Representations for introduction of new  trains  are received from various quarters  
including the State  Gover nments, Ministers, MPs , MLAs , general public , etc., at 
various levels of Railway  Administration , viz., Railway Station , Division , Zonal  
headquarters  and the Ministry  of Railways . The requests are examined and action  
as found feasible and justified is taken. Requests received from various quarters 
at Divisional  level would be forwarded to Zonal Headquarters office for further 
forwarding the same to Railway Board . Those proposals would be examined at 
Railway Board  and action  taken thereupon keeping in view the factors viz., 
demands, infrastructural availability, operational  feasibility , etc.  
Audit  would check the records to see whether the Administration  has studied the 
feasibility  of introduction viz., availability of links, coaches , path, etc., before 
submitting the proposal to the Railway  Board . 
7.13 Meeting  With Railway  Users Consultation Committees  
The following Consultative  Bodies  have been established  with a view to 
affording more frequent opportunities for consultation between Railway  
Administr ations and Railway Users on matter relating to the service  provided by 
railways and means of improving the efficiency  of such services.  
I) Railway  users’ Consultative  Committees at the Di visional  levels 
(DRUCC ). 
II) Zonal  Railway  Users’ Consultative  Committee  at the Headquarters  of 
each Railway (ZRUCC ) and  
III) National  Railway  Users’ Consultative  Council  (NRUCC ). 
Audit  will verify the records pertaining to the above to check whether the action  
was initi ated by the Railway  Administration  to address the issues brought out by 
the respective committees.  
[Ref. Chapter V of IR  code for Traffic  (Commercial ) Department ] 
7.14 Catering  Audit  
According to Catering  Policy  of 2017 , issued by Railway  Board , IRCTC  will be 
responsible for catering services through Mobile  Catering Units , Base Kitchens, 
Cell Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at A1, A Category  of stations , Food Plazas, 
Food Courts , Train  Side Vending , Jan Aahars (i. e., all Major  units ). 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
286 
For internal use of IA&AD  Railway  share of revenue to be given by IRCTC  shall be realised 
division/station/unit  wise on monthly  basis and reflected in monthly  Station  
Balance  Sheet  of the concerned station and in some cases submitted directly by 
IRCTC at Commercial  Department /Headquarters . 
I) If the re mittance  is reflected in the Station  Balance  Sheet , audit  check will 
verify whether the share provisioned is as per the latest circulars  of 
Catering  Policy  and there is no delay in remittance  of the share of revenue.  
II) If the remittance  details are available at Headquarters  Office , related 
records are checked to see the correctness of share of revenue passed on 
by IRCTC . 
All other Minor  Catering  Units  which are not covered  in ‘A’1,’ A’ stations  and 
Refreshments R ooms at ‘B’ and below category of stations, AVMs, Milk Stalls, 
Trolleys  shall be managed by the Zonal  Railways ; i.e., Allotment  of Minor units  
at A1, A, B & C category of stati ons will be done by divisions  through open 
tendering  system  within the similar reserved category.  
Recovery  of the dues such as licence fee, dues towards water  charges  and 
electricity charges , etc., will be taken care of by Commercial  Department . 
Audit  may be conducted as given  under Para  7.3 abov e. 
7.15 Container  Corporation  of India  (CONCOR ) 
Container  Corporation  of India  Limited  (CONCOR ) was set up  under the 
Ministry  of Railways  for dealing container traffic  by rail  . It should be seen that 
Railway Receipts issued by the nodal goods shed  for container traffic by 
CONCOR is in accordance with the haul age rates notified for container traffic 
from time to time.  
7.16 Furnishing of Data  for Printing of Zonal  Time Table  
Divisions  would furnish data to HQs with respect to active PRS  Centres, YTSK , 
JTBS , available Retiring  Rooms/Dormitories  and other facilities of their 
Divisions. This data received from all the Divisions of the Zone would be 
consolidated for inclusion in the Zonal  Time Table.  
8 CHECK OF COMMERCIAL TENDERS  & CONTRACTS  
Commercial  Department  would be inviting tenders  for commercial  activities 
including transactions with IRCTC , stations  cleanliness  etc. 
The Audit  checks  of these contracts  could be done according to the provisions 
under the Chapter - “Works  Audit”.  
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
287 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of items to be seen during i nspection  
General  
Table 04  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Review of cash  remittance  notes  including the examination of cash  
remittances  
2. Check  of guard’s signature  book for cash  bags 
3. Stamp  account  and imprest  cash account  
4. Review of license vendors , stall holder s, vehicles  
5. Review of ground  rent register  
6. Review of the register  of mis -declaration  of consignment of goods  
and parcels  
7. Review of the reports  of the Travelling  Inspector  of Accounts  
8. Review of the Inspection  Register  maintained at the station  
9. Review of the submission of  the returns  to the Accounts  Office  and 
due dates  
10. Maintenance  of tariffs , rate  circulars  and other publications supplied 
to the station  
11 Review of agreements of out agency , town booking  agency , siding 
agreements  
12. Delay in removal of parcels  and goods  by out agency /town booking  
office contractors  
13. Booking  of street delivery arrangements  
14. Working of collection of forwarding services arrangements  
15. Withdrawal  from station earnings  
16. Extra  casual  labour  payments  
17. Booking  of Railway  Material  Consignments  and RMC Notes  
18. Check  of free  service  way bills  
19. Advice  of internal  check  
20. Advertisement contracts  and other contract  files 
21. Sanction  of remission  order (RO), RO files  & books  
 
 
  
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
288 
For internal use of IA&AD  Goods  
Table 05  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Verification  of cash  on hand  immediately on arrival at the station 
and t he arrangements for the safe  custody of cash  
2. Preparation  of inventory  of goods  on hand  on arrival at the station 
and check of outstanding  goods with delivery book, tally book, 
vehicle  register , gate  pass etc  
3. Check  of invoices, delivery books  and goods  cash book  
4. Check  of wagon  demand registration  fee receipts  and refunds  and 
review of priority register  
5. Check  of recovery of wharfage , demurrage , cranage  and haulage  
charges  
6. Unconnected for invoices  
7. Check  of stock  of all money value books , invoice books , WDRF 
receipt  books , general receipts  and forms like indemnity  bonds etc 
(including saleable publications like forwarding notes  etc) 
8. Review of engagement  of goods , porters  with reference to yardstick 
prescribed  
9. Siding  charges  statements – goods , revision  of siding charges  to be 
seen 
10. Handling  bills, transhipment  bills 
11 Review of re -weighment  register  and accuracy  of weighing 
machines  
12. Test weighment  of goods  
13. Statement of unconnected goods  sent to CCM  
14. Analysis  of all goods  outstanding  including audit  advices  
15. Check  of balance  sheet  
16.  Advice  of internal  check of accounts  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
289 
For internal use of IA&AD  Coaching  – other than parcel and luggage  
Table 06  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Verificati on of cash  immediately on arrival at the station and the 
arrangements for the safe  custody of cash  
2. Examination  of arrangements of tickets  and check of fares  and closing 
numbers of tickets with those shown in the tubes and in the Daily  Trains 
Cash  Book and Proof Book  
3. Scrutiny  of the system  of indenting, verification  and custody of tickets  
by the station  
4. General  check of stock  of tickets  (printed  card, paper tickets and season 
tickets) on hand  and detail ed check of stock  of tickets (printed /card) for 
a few stations  
5. General  stock  of Railway  guides, Railway time  tables etc including all 
saleable pub lications and accounts  of sale proceeds thereof  
6. Check  of Daily  Trains Cash  Book  
7. Verification  of summary of Daily  Trains Cash  Book and Proof Bo ok 
8. Review of excess fare  tickets  and TTEs handing over Memo  register  
9. Check  of Emergent Duty  Pass/Tickets  
10. Revi ew of reservation  register  especially with reference to refunds  
11. Check  of Non -Issue  Tickets  summary  
12. Review of Retiring  Room Register  
13. Check  of Telegraph receipts  
14. Review of register  of Licensed porters  
15. Check  of miscellaneous /sundry earnings  
16. Witnessing of collection of tickets  and arrangements for curbing 
ticketless  travelling . Check  and disposal  of collected tickets and Ticket 
Collectors ’ register  
17. Review of the earnings  and justification  for the continuance of coaching  
camp service  
18. Check  of private  cash Register  (para 2429 of Commercial  Manual  
Vol.II)  
19.  Check  of balance  sheet  
20. Check  of Special  cancellation  and concessions  
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
290 
For internal use of IA&AD  Computerized Passenger Reservation System  
Table 07  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTI ON 
1. Register  showing the names of operator and shift supervisor  
2. Surprise verification  of cash  
3. Checks  of ticket roll  requisition and stock  book and marki ng of last 
ticket.  
4. Check  of Daily  Terminal Cash  Summary  
5. Check  of vouchers  (with documents ) 
6. Check  of vouchers  (without docum ents) 
7. Check  of fares  of tickets  (RAM  167 C II)  
8. Check  of accountal of BPTs  
9. Check  of Modified /Special  Cancelled  tickets  
10. Check  of cancelled tickets / refund  tickets  
11. Check  of non -issued  tickets  
12. Check  of roll  continuity  
13. Continuity  statements  
14. Check  of balance  sheet  
15. Check  of refunds  made manually  
16. Checks  of tickets  issued on credit  cards  
17. Issue  of duplicate tickets /BPTs  
18. Action taken on Inspection  Reports  
19. Error  Sheets  
20. Passenger  classification  
21. Pilgrim  Tax 
22. Check  of bill register  
23.   Check  of Private  Cash  Register  (para 2429 of Commercial  Manual  
Vol.II)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coaching  – Parcel and Luggage  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
291 
For internal use of IA&AD  Table 08  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Verification  of cash  immediately on arrival at the station and the 
arrangements for the safe  custody of cash  
2. Preparation  of inventory  of parcels , luggage  and left luggage on hand  
on arrival at the station and check of outstanding  parcels  with delivery 
books  and daily balance  in Sunday Stock  register  
3. Check  of parcel  way bills , delivery books  and parcel  cash book  
4. Check  of luggage  tickets , HCD tickets, left luggage etc  
5. Check  of recovery of wharfage , storage and demurrage  charges  
6. Unaccounted  for parcel  way bills  
7. Check  of stock  of all money value books  and forms  
8. Review of engagement  of parcel  porters  with reference to the yardstick 
prescribed  
9. Siding charges  statement – parcels  if any  
10. Handling  bills, transhipment  bills 
11. Review of re -weighment  register  and accuracy  of weighment machines  
12. Test weighment  of parcels  and luggage  
13. Statement of unconnected parcels  sent to CCM  
14. Analysis  of all coaching  outstanding  including audit  advices  
15. Accountal  of Error  Sheets  
16. Rebooking  (paid on) special  credits  and overcharges  sheets  
17. Preparation  of Test Balance  Sheet  by the station staff  
18. Preparation  of test balance  sheet by the inspection  party from the last 
balance  advice by the accounts  office upto the time  of latest ongoing  
inspections  
19. Paid parce ls way bills  issued during the month  fall within the machine  
number from/to  
20. Machine  number of “Paid” parcel  way bills  books  (Local  and Foreign ) 
21. Check  of private  cash Register  (para 2429 of Commercial  Manual  
Vol.II)  
22. Check  of balance  sheet  
23. Statement of losses and loss  property  office  
24. Auction  sale 
25. Remissio n orders  
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
292 
For internal use of IA&AD  Commercial Department  
Table 09  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Bills  and Bills Register  
2. Tools  and plant accounts -Idle machinery Register  
3. Stationery and consumable  stores  account  
4. Clothing  and liveries  account  
5. Register  of reference to library  books  
6. Stamp  account  
7. Imprest  account  
8. Railway  materials  consignment notes  and credit  notes  charged bills  for 
Railway materials  
9. Adjustment  memos  
10. Write off  statements  
11. Miscellaneous  cash Register , cash  receipt  and cash  remittance  notes -Misc  
cash returns  sent to accounts  office  
12. Pay orders  
13. Stores  account  comparison  on issue  note with indents  advice notes  of 
returned stores  
14. Auction  sales , if any  
15. Register  of losses including damage /deficiencies  
16. Register  of repairs  to type writers, office Bicycles  
17. Check  of cash  value and other machine  numbered books  
18. Review of expenses  in connection with entertainment of outsides in 
connection with official business  
19. Review of previous Audit  and accounts  reports  any ot her special  points 
as advised by other sections, items of special  investigations if any, 
Review of sub office records  
20. Empties  accounts  
21. Register  of agreement  
22. Tenders  and contracts -completion  reports  
23. Review of Inspection  reports  of GM /HODs etc  
24. Liability  Register  
25. Efficiency  of internal  check.  The items selected for my original Audit  
have been verified  
26. Sanction  of remission  order files  & Remission  order book  
27.  Correspondence of write off  sanctions  
** As Per Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines , Audit  of Personnel  Portion 
Would Be Covered During The Inspection  of Personnel Branch  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
293 
For internal use of IA&AD  Special Points  
Table 10  
SL. NO.  POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING INSPECTION  
1. Licence  fee from vendors , Book stalls, refreshment st alls etc.  
2. Car Stand, Cycle  Stand Contracts  
3. Porters’ licence fees  
4. Concessions  
5. Ground Rent  Register  & Land  lease register  
6. Refund  Orders  
7. Clearance of Out standings  
8. Halts , Cases of losses, Default in money transactions at stations , 
missing  tickets  
9. Account  of saleabl e publications viz., Time tables , tariffs , etc.  
10. Revision  of wharfage  and Demurrage  charges  
11. Compensation  claims  
12. Actio n taken note against staff  for haulage , missing  goods , missing 
sheets  and misuse of passes  
13. TTE links  
14. TTEs reports  
15. Sale of tickets  at train halts  
16. Action taken against TTEs for reduced collections as compared to 
section  average  
17. De-casualisation of licensed  porters  
18. Review of results of cross checks  
19. Under  weighment  of goods , parcels  by goods  clerks  
20. Catering  accounts  
21. Allotment  of rest  house /retiring rooms  
22. P&L account  of catering establishments  
23. Review of working of goods  shed handling contracts  
24. Review of  Rake  links  
25. Recovery  of clearance of Admitted  Debits  
26. Review of arrangement of supply  of stationery to stations  
27 Award of contracts  for Pay  & Use Toilet  
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 – Audit of Commercial Department  
 
294 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
295 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 9 – OPERATING DEPARTMENT  
1. INTRODUCTION  
The Operating  department is primarily concerned with the running  of both 
coaching  (passengers  and parcel ) and goods  trains . Operating department 
harnesses the efforts of all the departments  of the Railways  and optimizes usage 
of operational  assets  viz. tracks, signals, fixed  installations and rolling stock .  
The broad  functions  of the operating department include planning  of transport  
service , running  of trains  and their continuous watch, safety , economy  and 
efficiency  as well as monitoring  of transportation all over the country. 
Transportation  directorate  in Railway  board is associated with planning  of 
movement of trains -passengers  and goods . 
1.1 Increase in Traffic  
The passenger  traffic  has seen a constant increase over the years, due to increase 
in population as well as due to increased requ irement to travel due to economic  
development . The freight  traffic  has also increased simultaneously. The 
Operating  Department  studies these increasin g requirements and takes suitable 
action  to satisfy these requirements. This also involves planning  for 
infrastructural development  -such as stations , yards , sidings , stabling lines, 
washing  pits, goods  terminal  etc.  Operating Department plays a pivotal role in 
transportation in close coordination  with other departments  like Engineering , 
Commercial , Mechanical , Signal  and Telecommunication  etc. 
1.2 The major  objectives  of Operating  department in IR  are as follows:  
I) Operations  of trains  with economy ,  efficiency  and safety  
II) Punctuality  of the mail / express and passenger  trains . 
III) Planning  for acquisition  of rolling stock  
IV) Optimum   utilization of the rolling stock  
V) Maximum utilization of the sectiona l capacity  
VI) Reduction in detentions  
VII) Optimum  utilization of the train crew  
2. ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE  
2.1 At Railway  Board  and Zonal  level  
The operating department is headed by Member  Operations & business 
Development  at the Railway  Board  level. At the Zonal  level, Principal  Chief  
Operations  Manager  is responsible for implementation  of various policies and 
guidelines  framed  by RB  regarding operations  of trains . He is assisted by Chief 
Passenger  Transport  Manager (CPTM ), Chief Freight  Transport Manager 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
296 
For internal use of IA&AD  (CFTM ), and Chief Transport Planning  Manager (CTPM ). The organization  
structure of the operating department has been illustrated with the following 
diagram.  
 
2.2 Field Level - Division  (Operational level) - 
Real action  in terms of implementation  of policies occurs here. 
 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT  
The major  roles and responsibilities of the department at various levels are 
illustrated below:  Member Operations & business 
Development
GM
PCOM
CPTM
DY.COM 
(Cog)
STM (Cog)
ATM (TT)CFTM
DY.COM 
(Gds)DY.COM 
(FOIS)CTM (…)Dy.CME 
(P&F)Dy.CEE (Opn)CTPM
STM (Rules)
ATM (Rules)PRINCIPAL 
(ZRTI, BSL)
ATM -I ATM -IIDY.COM (HQ) PS

Railway Audit Manual  
 
297 
For internal use of IA&AD  3.1 Level: Ministry  of Railways  (Railway  Board ) 
Railway  Board  Member  Operations  and Business  Development  (M/O&BD ), 
mainly looks after the charge of Coaching, Traffic  Transportation, Commercial , 
Non-Fare Revenue , Tourism  and Catering , Marketing  and Business 
Development , IT.  AM/Traffic Trans portation has the charge of Train Operations 
in Indian Railways .  
However, at the Zonal  level, Principal  Chief  Operations  Manager  is responsible 
for implement ation  of various policies and guidelines  framed  by RB  regarding 
operations  of trains . He is assisted by Chief Passenger  Transport  Manager 
(CPTM ), Chief Freight  Transport Manager (CFTM ), and Chief Transport 
Planning  Manager (CTPM ). The organization  structure of the operating 
department  has been illustrated with the following diagram.  
Roles and responsibilities:  
I) All Plannin g related issues handled by the Traffic  Transportation  
Directorate , Assessment  of rollin g stock  for provision in the annual  
rolling stock  program, Traffic planning  and Five Year  Plan, Traffic 
Transportation shield.              
II) All matte rs of Zonal  Railway  traffic  and maintenance  of related statistics, 
President , PM , MR , CRB , MT, and associated offices excluding 
Inspection  notes , Preparation  of Periodical  report for Cabinet , Parliament  
questions  on various issues like booking  and trans portation of goods , the 
working capacity of goods  trains , earning from rake  points, block  rakes , 
goods  rakes , Freight  Terminals , Railways  operating assets  
III) Issues /policies related to quota /restrictions and maintenance  of related 
statistics, Traffic  blocks , Weighbridge s, PCDOs of both GMs/COMs, 
JCM, PNM  and PREM  items, Performance  review of zonal Railways , 
brief for Board , The nodal agency  for matters of Bangl adesh Railway , 
Nepal and Bhutan Traffic, All operational  and other matters of Indo -Pak 
traffic  including parliamentary  questions , Freight  Train  Operations , 
Originating , Freight loading  targets , Performance and Measures for 
achieving the target, Operating  Efficiency , Monthly  Operating Review, 
Freight performance  of KRCL  - related issues and policies, 
COM's /CFTMs conference -related issues, indents  - including outstanding  
indents , A-III references , Nepal and Bhutan Traffic, military  movement 
and policies (MILRAIL ), ports, higher axle  load, RDSO  etc.   
IV) All matters of - Ores, Iron and Steel  traffic , Movement of RMSP , Export 
ore, etc, Personal  effects,  P&T stores , bone, and bone meals, rubber 
goods , Machinery , and Steel furnitur e, and Electric  Appliances, 
Medicines , drugs and glucose Wine and spirit, Tea and coffee, Empty 
barrels and containers, Hides and skins, foodgrain/pulses movement 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
298 
For internal use of IA&AD  including movement of livestock, fodder,  jute products, movement of all 
relief  materials , Movement of salt – edible, industrial, Fertilisers, 
Potatoes, Onions, Spices like jeera, garlic, Sugar, sugarcane, jaggery, etc, 
Oil in drums and tins(indigenous only), Timb er, firewood and charcoal, 
Exhibition goods , Aluminium including goods , Railway  materials , 
Oilseeds and oil cakes, Cotton, wool, textiles including raw, material  for 
textile mil ls, Paper including raw material  to paper mills, Soap and 
soapstone, Export of commodities  etc. 
V) RTC  for movement of all commodities , coal and POL, etc. and proposals 
of new  sidings  
VI) Movement of departmental  wagons /departmental  materials  issues, 
policies and maintenance  of related statistics, Coordination  work  related 
to misc meetings related to the traffic  department, All policy  issues related 
to FOIS ,  
VII) Audit  Paras  and C&AG  meeting and reports  
VIII) Accident  cases (recommendations  of CRS /CCRS  and CCRS's, reports  on 
safety  matters), matters of safety in train operations  
IX) Assisting DT T/POL in cases related to the " Right  to Information  Act" 
3.2 Level: Zonal  Headquarters  
Roles and responsibilities  
I) Cadre  Managemen t and Training  of Operating  and Control  Staff  
II) Running  of trains  and continuous watch, prescribing and observance of 
rules  and p rocedures of safe  train operation , average  speed  of goods  
trains , traction wise average  load of goods  trains , punctuality  of Mail  and 
Express and other passenger  trains  etc. 
III) Processing of procurement  of store  viz. Stock  and Non -stock  items. 
IV) Crew  management  and Roster  of guards  and Periodic review of crew 
requirement and Monitoring  of movement and Interchange  – both inter 
Zonal  and inter Divisional  including crew and loco  balancing.  
V) Management  of Goods  wagons  distribution , Wagon  related issues like 
Wagon kilometers  per wagon  day, Net tonne -kilometers  per wagon  day, 
etc. 
VI) Monitoring  and expediting various works  of Traffic , Doublings, New  lines , 
Gauge  conversions, etc.  
VII) Meeting  of Loading  and Earnings  targets  and other indices  of asset  
utilization.  
VIII) Regular  coordination  with concerned departments  for ensuring desired 
loco and crew availability including day to day balancing of Loco  and 
Crew  across various Divisions /locations.  
IX) Management  and Position of dead  stock  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
299 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) The originating tonnage  of revenue -earning freight  traffic  by broad  
commodity  groups and Earning per million tones of originating traffic  by 
selected commodities . 
XI) Engines  related issues viz. hours available for use per day per engine , 
engine  kilometers  per day per engine  day online /in use, fuel consumption  
under the various services, traction wise, etc.  
XII) Estimation  of damages  to stock due to careless a nd rough shunting . 
XIII) Monitoring  of transportation of Coaching  and Goods  trains  under Railway  
Board  orders/circulars /guid elines . For smooth movement of trains  
XIV)  Scrutiny  and approval  of GADs/ESPs/SIPs related to above including 
coordination  with divisions  and other depart ments  for their expeditious 
finalization.  
XV) Timetabling  of passengers  carrying trains  and Punctuality , monitoring , 
and analysis  of train operations . 
XVI)  Assessment  of Passenger  demand and proposals for the introduction of 
new trains  and Coordination  for inaugural functions  for the introduction 
of new  trains /extensions.  
XVII)  Coordination  with Commercial  branch for temporary augmentation of 
trains  to meet day to day extra rush.  
XVIII)  Freight  traffic  and Management  of Freight Terminals  and monitoring  of 
Terminal performance  and the originating tonnage  of revenue -earning 
freight  traffic  by broad  commodity  groups.  
XIX)  Marketing  efforts for attracting new  traffic  and retaining existing traffic . 
XX) Monitoring  the entire Divisional  activities    
3.3 Level: Divisional /Field  
Roles and responsibilities  
I) Ensuring safe  and punctual  running  of trains  over the divisi on 
II) Ensuring optimum  utilization of Railway  assets  by maximizing output  
with available inputs  
III) Proper  coordination  with service  departments  taking into consideration 
various assets  of Railways  like tracks, wagons , engines , signal  etc. 
IV) Day to day analysis  of train running  
V) Planning  for timetabling of mail/express and passenger  trains  
VI) Accident  and unusual  management  and arranging proper relief  
VII) Carrying out periodical  inspections  
VIII) Day to day analysis  of control  charts  to ensure proper planning  for the 
running  of goods  trains  
IX) Carrying out freight  operations  in all aspects  
X) Day to day analysis  of Engine  usage  
XI) Close monitoring  of all terminal  detentions  
XII) Analysis  and sanction of blocks  to the construction  organization  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
300 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIII) Ensuring correct and timely data feeding at all terminals  by FOIS  In-
charge  
XIV)  Preparation  of Freight  Power  Plan and crew review  
XV) Monitoring  of crews  and Guards  requirements  
XVI)  Grouping of rolling stocks (rake  formation) and t heir despatch in a 
predetermined manner to ensure train safety , operational  expediency and 
to maximize customer  convenience.  
Criteria for identification  of Apex , Audit  and Implementing  units     
I) Ministry  Level -  
The criteria  for identification  of Apex , Audit  and Implementing  Units  at 
Ministry  Level. i.e. Railway  Board  Level is according to the following –  
a) Railways  Act, 1989   
b) Indian  Railway  Operating  Manual    
c) Manual  of Statistical Instructions  Volume -1 
d) Indian  Railways  (Open  Lines) General  and Subsidiary  Rules . 
e) Consolidated  List of Subjects  Dealt with by Various Branches in the 
Ministry  of Railways  Organisation  and Methods Unit - July 2013, 
depicted in the portal  of Railway  Board , New  Delhi , which is a single 
window to information and services being prov ided by the various 
Indian  Railways  entities and is a collaborative effort of various Indian 
Railways Entities  and Departments  Maintained by CRIS , Ministry of 
Railways,  Government  of India .  
II) Field Level  i.e . Zonal /Divisional  Railway  - 
Similarly, the criteria  for identification  of Field Level. i.e. 
Zonal/Divisional  Railway  Level is  as per item number I (a to d) 
mentioned above.  
4. ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT BY  THE DEPARTMENT AT 
THE MINISTRY AS  WELL AS THE FIELD LEVEL  
List of Activities  of Operating  Officers in Operating Department   
I) Principal  Chief  Operations  Manager  (PCOM ) 
The Principal  Chief  Operations  Manager  is the centralised authority  to co -
ordinate , direct  and control  freight  and passenger  train operations . He also 
looks after the freight  marketing  of the Railway  system . All major  
Railway users co -ordinate  with the PCOM  to develop their Railway 
facilities.  
II) Chief  Freight  Transportation  Manager  (CFTM )  
Over  all Freight  Operations , Meeting  Loading and Earning Targets and 
action  thereon, Extended crew run  and action  thereon, Finalization of 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
301 
For internal use of IA&AD  Power  Plan and rationalization  of Loco  run, Streamlining of Carriage  and 
Wagon  examination, Optimizing usage of Rolling  stock , Freight Terminal 
management , Co-ordination  with Railway  Board  and Zonal  Railways , 
Reply of Draft  Para and Audit  Para concerned to freight  operation , 
Disposal  of MPs  and MLAs  suggestion/complaint  with respect to freight  
Movement, Reply to Boards letters on freight  related subjects, Marketing  
efforts for maximizing freight  traffic , Policy  issues and suggestions for 
amendment to help loading  / operations , Movement of ODC  and 
Monitoring  of FOIS . 
III) Chief   Passenger  Transportation  Manager  (CPTM )   
Overall in -charge of Passenger  and Suburban  trains , VP movement for 
Parcels  etc, Time Tabling of trains , Suburban transport  operations  and 
operations  and other allied coaching  matters, Punctuality  of trains , 
Establishment  matters, Introduction/Revision  of timings of Passenger 
trains .   
IV) Chief  Transportation  Planning  Manager  (CTPM ) 
Traffic  Transportation  Planning , Monitoring  of various works  on Traffic 
facilities/Doubling /New  line/Gauge  conversion  and other works  required 
for improvement of the train movement, Scrutiny  of plans  and proposals, 
Reply of MP/MLA references , All sidings  related works , Zonal  training  
school, Review of survey  matters, Policy  matters, Operating  safety  related 
issues ( viz. dispensation matters, speed  certificates, opening of new  lines  
etc.)  and Compliance  of the letters of CRS .  
V) Deputy  Chief  Operations  Manager  (DY. COM) (GOODS)  
Rationalization  in loco  and crew run , Optimum  usage of rolling stock , 
Freight  operations , Crack trains  monitoring , Performance  of different 
terminals  as well as Power  Houses located over Eastern  Railway , Close 
co-ordination  with the concerned branch to improve their performance  
and CRS  sanctions  of rolling stock .  
VI) Deputy  Chief  Operations  Manager  (Dy.COM) (COACHING ) 
Punctuality  and coaching  operation , Punctuality matters including all 
references  of punctuality ,  Par liament  Questions relating to Punctuality, 
MP/MLA's references  and Public  representation/complaints , Stores  
related works , Emergency  control and management  thereby, Coaching  
Conference, Speed  Restrictions and references  thereby, Review of GR  
and SR , Compliance  of the  safety  inspections , Preparation  of records of 
inspections  conducted by Operating  Officers, Industrial  relations and any 
other matters arising t ime-to-time. 
 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
302 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) Deputy  Chief  Operations  Manager  (Dy. COM ) (FOIS ) 
 Monitoring  and liaison  with Divisional  and Zonal  Authorities of 
Civil /construction , S&T  and Electrical  staff for timely preparation of sites 
and electrical fittings  etc.  at locations over the Zonal Railways , Ensuring 
that works  are commissioned as per target laid  down by CAO /FOIS  and 
Railway  Board  and liaison with Divisional authorities  and DOT  to ensure 
timely availability of Railway/BSNL  channels up  to specified locations, 
Assisting the IRCOT /CRIS /FOIS Telecom  in commissioning  of FOIS  
terminals  as well as implementation  of FOIS/ICMS /TMS /COA /CMS  and 
other related system , Ensuring that data  feeding in all the divisions  is 
being done timely on real time  basis and correct figures of 
Divisional/Zonal/Interchange  points are coming on computer  and 
discrepancies are sorted out qui ckly, Ensuring that all the instructions  
issued by FOIS central  organization  are communicated to divisional  
offices and are complied with, Ensuring that properly trained staff  work  
properly on FOIS/terminals in HQ  and divisional  offices, If sufficient 
number of trained staff  are not available, he will arrange training  of staff  
in consultation with CPM /FOIS, Ensuring that system  runs smoothly over 
his Zone and in case of any discrepancy in system  he will chase up with 
CRIS/CMC or CPM/FOIS, Ensuring that system  over his zone is working 
properly with the help of Dy.CNM  posted on his zone, Liaison  with 
Network Managers , Sr. Divisional Operations  Managers of his zone and 
central  organization of CRIS and FOIS/HQ NDLS as regards working and 
maintenance  of PCs, Printers, ACs, Hubs, Modems and Routers etc. are 
concerned, Ensuring timely action  by divisional  authorities  prior to 
extensio n and application  of all system  as per instruction of CAO/FOIS, 
Visiting  field units  from time  to time  to ensure smooth transition of all 
three phases of FOIS/IMS/C MS/CAO/ICMS and other sub systems from 
manual  band of computer based, Providing timely feedback to CFTM  as 
well as CPM/FOIS, Assisting CFTM/Sr. DOMs in ensuring that annual  
maintenance  contract s are entered into well in time  and day -to-day 
maintenance  problems are sorted out and Any other work  assigned by 
CFTM/CAO/Superior Officials.  
VIII) Senior /Assistant  Transportation  Manager  (Goods )-I, (Goods) -II, 
(Planning ) and (Coaching ) 
Assisting Dy.COM/Rules  OM/Rules regarding Safety  matters pertainin g 
to the following duties, Revision  of GR  and SR  (issue  of correction slips), 
Monitoring  of overdue cases of Refresher  Course, Vision test etc., 
Preparing safety -related papers, Co -ordination  with Principal , ZRTI  and 
other traffic  Training  Institutes , Analyzing and compiling of training  
related information, Dealing with the cases of dispensation related to the 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
303 
For internal use of IA&AD  Signal  and Engineering  department, Compliance  of CRS  inspection  and 
other safety -related inspe ctions , Legal  matters/Court  cases of the 
Operating  Department , Maintaining of various Operating and 
Commercial  circulars , Preparation  of operating data, Preparation of 
MCDO  and other monthly  statistical figures, Correspondence of letters, 
ODC  movement, Examination  of plans  and proposals, Review  of Works  
related matters, Coordination  with different Divisions  and departments  to 
expedite the work , Examination of dispensation matters/other safety 
matters as and when  entrusted  and Preparation of draft reply for both 
Boards’ letters and other Works related matters.  
Control  Organization  
This basic structure of Operating  control  on Indian  Railways  exists at the 
Divisional  Level, which has also been extended to Area control  levels. In 
addition, Central  Control  office is si tuated in the headquarters  office and one at 
Railway  Board .  
Responsibility of traffic  operation  throughout the Zonal  Railway  lies wi th 
PCOM , assisted by CPTM , CFTM .  The PCOM advices all divisions  regarding 
traffic  and ensure that the objectives  are fulfilled as per policy  guideli nes and 
planning . 
  Activities  of the control  organization  are with an objective : 
I) To ensure Punctuality  of the mail / express and passenger  trains . 
II) To ensure maximum  utilization of the rolling stock  
III) To ensure maximum  utilization of the section  capacity  
IV) To increase the speed  of goods  trains . 
V) Maximum utilization of the train crew.  
Traffic  control  is divided into two units  at the HQ  level for easing up its 
objectives : 
I) Central  control  and 
II) Emergency  control  
Divisional  Control  Office  - Basic activities of Control Organization  at 
Divisional Level:  
The activities of the Control  organization  may, for the purpose of understanding 
be conveniently classified  under the heads of planning , execution  and review , 
though in practice , all three activities go on simultaneously.  
I) PLANNING: Forecast  of interchange, trains  to be run  section  wise, 
supply  of empties  for bulk loading  transhipment , unloading  etc.  Planning  
for engineering  blocks  and special  moves.  The plan is made by C TNL  
daily at 0800 hrs. and reviewed by Sr.DOM  and HQ  is informed by 1000 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
304 
For internal use of IA&AD  hrs. both immediate and antecedent, for taking remedial  action  to prevent 
their recurrence.  
II) EXECUTION:  The day's pl an is to be executed by yards , loco  sheds , 
TXR  depots , transhipment  Supervisors , Area controls, S tation Masters, 
Yard Masters. Therefor e, the plan should be communicated to them as 
soon as it is finalized. Instructions  are given in the course of the morning 
conference , modified as necessary after conference  with the HQ . The 
performance  is reviewed once at 1600 hrs and briefly at night . 
III) REVIEW: Review of the activities of control  office by Sr. DOM , 
DOM, AOM.  
a) Analyzing shortfalls of previous day to take remedia l measures  and 
pin point weak spots;  
b) Provide basic data for planning  for current  day. 
c) Following are the main features  of the previous day's performance  
which are reviewed:  
Interchange , Divisional  wagon  balance , Train  running , Disposition of empties , 
Particulars of stabled loads, Yard  balances, Unloading on division, Registrations 
and loading , Transhipment  performance , Punctuality , Power  utilization, Sick  line 
working, Accidents,  unusua l occurrence, Special  type stock  and Crane  wagons  
(heavy lift) . 
Specific Duties of Control  Staff  highlighted operating manual -traffic .pdf:  
The main duties of control  staff which are only guidelines  to their day to day 
working and are not exhaustive are as under.  
I) Chief  Controller  (In-charge): The chief controller  is in overall charge 
of control  office and is responsible for the total transportation of the 
Division  on day to day basis. His duties include – 
A review of the previous day’s performa nce to confirm that all forecasts 
made have been fully met,  For shortfalls, convincing reasons have to be 
pinpointed to prevent a recurrence, Prepare current  forecast  indicating 
assistance needed from h eadquarters , adjoining Division , Railways  
relating to interchange, loading , and locomotive  utilization, Checking 
control  charts  and bri nging to the notice of the Senior  Divisional  
Operations  Manager /Divisional Operations Manager all avoidable 
detention  to trains , Punctuality  performance  with particular reference to 
trains  which lost  punctuality , Scrutiny  of stock  papers, Monitoring  
interchange obligation s, Watching detention  to stock  at stations  and 
terminals , Watching the work  of Marshalling  yards /Freight  terminals, 
Watching t he utilization of loco  and their terminal  detention , Checking 
duty hours of running  staff and balancing of crews , Attending control  
office in cases of accident   and Establishment  work  of control  office.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
305 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Chief  Controller  (Movement)/ Dy.  Chief Controller : The activities of 
Chief  Controller(Movement) include -Running  of goods  train, preparing 
interchange forecast , and monitoring  the same, loco  utilisation and 
passenger  and goods  train operations  in general,  Allotting empty  
stock /rakes  to loading  stations  in accordance with current  priority 
regulations  along with Deputy  Chief Controller (Stock ), maintaining 
constant touch with adjacent Divisions  through regular conference  to 
facilitate  the smooth flow of traffic , Dealing immediately with significant 
detention  or transport  bottleneck  and other unusual incidents.  Keeping 
constant touch with the working of major  terminals  and Marshalling  yards  
and taking timely action  to deal with congestion ,  Giving advice of serious 
accidents  to all concerned, and taking, charge of the affected se ctions, 
Supervising the running  of oversized  consignments , Maintaining liaison  
with Power  controller , Coordinate  the work  of various section  controllers, 
Maintain discipline among control  staff in the absence of Chief controller  
and Maintain coordination  and liaison with various functionar ies involved 
in train running . 
III) Chief  Controller  (Stock )/Dy.  Chief Controller:  The Chief 
Controller/Stock Scrutinizes the indent  register  in detail wi th regard to the 
oldest date of registration , nature of goods  and type of stock  required for 
lifting goods  as per the oldest date of registration, Checks Divisional  stock  
report and position of empties  and different stock  reports  received from 
the various points and planning  in advance the supply  of stock , loading  
and clearance keeping in view interchange obligation an d orders received.  
Checks tran shipment  activity and Chases movements of stock  as per 
supply  order issued on the previous day.  Keeps a close watch over the 
hot axle , special  type and unconnected wagons ,  Cross -checks  the daily 
Restriction Bulletin with Restriction Messages received from the HQ  
office and issuing the same, Ass ists the Sr.DOM / DOM in allotments,  
Keeps a close watch over the movements of seasonal perishable traffic  
and supply  of suitable stock  for its clearance, Watches movements of 
damaged loaded stock  in sick lines and yards  on their Division , Informs 
all major  customers  about their inward trains ’ expected arrival based on 
FOIS  pipeline, Optimising loa ding, unloading , transhipment  etc. 
IV) Dy. Chief  Controller  (Punctuality ): 
a) Ensuring punctuality  of passenger  trains  in system . 
b) Ensuring punctuality  at the start of all outgoing passenger  trains . 
c) Maintaining Detention  Reports  of Coaching  trains . 
d) Ensure that late  running  trains  make up time . 
V) Section  Controller : Reporting for duty  at the prescribed  time and 
ascertaining the position of the section  from his reliever and r ecording the 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
306 
For internal use of IA&AD  movement of trains  on the ‘Control ’ graph including crossing, 
connections,  shunting  and ascertaining reasons for detentions etc., 
Arranging for the supply  and clearance of stock  as ordered by Dy.  Chief  
Controller, Advising stations  in advance of the work  to be done on trains  
on move.  Informing sheds  and stations about the late  running  of the trains  
to avoid the calling of Crew  and Guards  earlier than necessa ry or to put 
back trains  wherever advisable, informing major  stations and concerned 
Section controller  about the current  running  of trains  on the section  and 
their anticipated arrivals well in time .  Keeping in close touch with 
Engineering –blocks  and working of material  Trains so   as to give the 
maximum  possible time  with least detention  to other traffic , Incident 
management  to include adjusting movements of the trains  in view of the 
likely impact  of the incident, informing all concerned, Keeping a watch 
over damaged vehicles detached at roadside statio ns and arranging repair 
or tran shipment  of their contents and proper attention on the part of the 
train examining staff , Arrangement of ART  and M/Van in case of an 
accident , Eliminating all possible detention  to train and stock , Watching 
the working of Marshalling  yards  and major terminals , Making timely 
arrangements for the relief  of Guards/Loco  pilots  whose duty hours are 
likely to exceed enroute and  Recording stock  report (where stock  clerks 
are not posted)  
VI) Station  Master  : 
a) Supervise the train operation  and ensure that staff  is working as per 
Station  Working Rules . 
b) Ensure smooth train operation  and pun ctual  running  of trains . 
c) Inform the divisional  officers/ controls immediately regarding any 
unusual  occurrence / failures.  
d) Deal with passenger  complaints  on priority.  
e) Ensure that competent  staff is deputed on the job.  
f) Maintain station records properly.  
g) Supervise VIP  movements on the station.  
VII) Traffic  Inspector :  
a) Inspect the stations  / sections in a sensitive manner.  
b) Conduct D&AR  enquiry.  
c) Manage the staff  in his jurisdiction . 
d) Supervise and counsel the operating staff  to work  as per rule.  
e) Highlight the grievances  / operational  problems to higher officials.  
f) Maintain and update the data and records of stations  under his 
jurisdiction . 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
307 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) Office  Superintendent of Operating  Branch . 
a) Over  all supervision of Operating  branch/section  in DRM ’s office.  
b) Early clearance of HQrs. letter reply / DO letters reply, s ubmission of 
required information to HQrs in time , dealing with court  cases / Audit  
paras / inspections  in time  
c) Circulation of instructions  received from Railway  
Boards/HQrs/Divisional  level to all concerned in time . 
Role of Marshalling i n Yards  
Marshalling  is attaching of vehicles on a train in a pre -determined manner to 
ensure train safety , provide operational  expediency and to maximize customer  
convenience. For block  rake composition and marshalling  order, ‘Normal 
composition and marshalling  order and Rake  link of passenger  trains  are issued 
by PCOMs of respective Railways . 
 The Yard  in-charge has following set of staff  under him.  
I) Field staf f:  Functions of field staff  include - Uncoupling the wagons , 
Braking of wagons , Relaying     of signals, Operating  the points and 
Piloting engine .  
II) Trains Branch :  CTNC or Head TNC  has overall responsibility for the 
efficient working of the trains ’ branch.  Below them, there are Head 
TNCs/ Sr. TNCs/ TNCs, who may be on shift duties or during day  duty 
only,  depending on the work  load of the yard .  
Main works  performed by yards : Generally a yard  is required to perform the 
following work  with due regard to efficiency , reliability, economy  and safety :  
I) To pass through trains  after changing of engine  and carriage examination 
and detaching sick wagons , if any, and adjusting load of the train,  if 
necessary, break up and sort out terminating trains  and loads and the local  
loads originating in the yard , form originating through trains  for the 
farthest point possible in accordance with long -distance Marshalling  
orders laid  down by the HQ  office, form shunting  and van trains  for the 
different sections served by the yard, hold back trains  and wagons  until 
they are able to go out and in the process keep wagon  detention  to the 
minimum.  
II) To move train engines  and pilots  between the yard /Loco  Shed and sidings , 
placement and removal of  - Inward  loaded wagons  for the goods  shed, 
loco shed, private  sidings , etc. served by the Marshalling  yard, Wagons  
from the repacking shed to the yard, Sick /Fit wagons  from the sick lines.  
Assessment  of room by the nominated shunting  trains  for roadsid e 
stations , arrangements for supply  of stock  as per Indent Register  and ODR 
required by the roadside station in accordance with the orders received 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
308 
For internal use of IA&AD  from the CTNL  (Stock ), weighment  of wagons  in certain nominated yards  
as and when required, maintenance  of the correct tally of the daily output  
of the yard  and Maintenance  of record of detentions to other kinds of stock  
such as local  loaded, sick wagons , empties  and special  stock  etc. 
 Master  Chart:  Master Ch arts incorporating all passenger  carrying trains  and 
realistic goods  train paths are prepared in consultation with Operating  Officers, 
Controllers, Yard  Staff , Powe r Controller , Station  Masters of important stations  
etc. in order to find out line  capacity of the section , highlight the set of suitable 
paths for guidance  of Control , which can be used for goods  train ordering also 
and prepare tentative goods  train time  table for selected express stream of trains . 
Freight  Train Operation -  
The freight  business is the major  source of revenue for the Indian  Railway . Main 
activity centres  of freight  operation  include term inals , yards , control  office and 
stations . 
I) Broad  Classification  of Goods  Trains - 
a) End to End,  
b) Work  Trains, Shunting  Trains, and Pilots  etc. and  
c) Departmental  trains : 
II) Complexity of Freight  Operations : 
Freight  operation  is generally more complex th an passenger  train 
operations  for the following reasons:  
a) The changing pattern and fluctuations in demand for rakes /wagons  
due to changes in the level of production , change s in the pattern of 
distribution  and consumption  centres  
b) The variety of commodities  to be moved, with different characteristics 
and type of wagons  required  
c) Preferential traffic  schedules, rationalization  schemes and other 
public  policy  regulations  
i. Seasonal  variations in demand  
ii. Time taken in loading /unloading -whether manual  or mechanical  
iii. Train  examination  Systems  - End to End/Intensive  Examination , 
Premium end to end and C.C. rake  
This cyclic operation  requires constant monitoring  and co -ordination . 
Ordering of Goods  Train : 
III) Planning  of Locomotives : 
a) Power  Plan:   
b) Loco  Outage and Loco Utilisation:   
Railway Audit Manual  
 
309 
For internal use of IA&AD  c) Control  of Operating  Department  on Loco  running :  
d) Availability of Engine  Crew  and Guard:  
e) Availability of path:  
IV) Headquarters  Role in Freight  Operations  
The Division ’s freight  operations  generally required close co-ordination  
and assistance from other Divisions  and Railways . While direct  contact is 
also maintained by the control  and operating officers of various Divisions, 
the Z onal Head Quarters  play a pivotal role in this respect. Some of the 
functions  performed by the Head Quarters are summarized below:  
V) Management  Information  System  
a) Important information concerning the position freight  operations  on 
various divisions  of Railways  is obtained through line  and stock  report 
daily tele phonically or through FOIS  or tele printer or FAX to the head  
quarters  (central  control ) from divisional  control , now more and more 
zones and Rail way Board  are shifting to FOIS generated reports . This 
includes, loading  and stock  position particulars of old outstanding  and 
fresh registration  of indents , category wise position of unloading , 
transhipment , yard  balance  important yards  and wagons  on divisions , 
train running  on each section ,  
Position is reviewed and analyzed by the PCOM /CFTM /DY. COM 
(Goods ), STM (GOODS) / CMPE  (R and L) and CELE . The 
importan t position pertaining to various departments  is conveyed to 
the department concerned as well as the G.M., the head  quarters  office 
also obtains the statements at the end of each month  or whenev er 
required and the performance  is compared with (i) the targets  (ii) the 
figures of the previous months (iii) the figures of the corresponding 
months of the previous years and (iv) the best ever record etc.  
b) Head quarter s play an important part in planning  and coordination  
freight  operations . After detailed discussion with the operation  
officers and in terms of Rail way Boards current  operating directives, 
head  quarters issues direction regarding the following -  
i. Interchange  tractions (category wise),   
ii. Loading  and unloading ,  
iii. Traffics insight from other Railways /Divisions , this information 
is now available on FOIS  terminal , where a pipe line  can be seen 
from end to end and expected arrival of t rains  at destination  is also 
estimated by FOIS system .,  
iv. Convey priority for the day and set quantified objectives  to be 
achieved,  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
310 
For internal use of IA&AD  v. Reviewing the work  done at the important a ctivity centre by yards , 
terminals  etc,  
vi. Train  and traffic  regulation in case of accidents  etc,  
vii. Certain items of goods  operations  are directly  controlled by Head 
Quarters  e.g. Co -ordination  and directions regarding rake  loading  
of programmed and committed traffic , movement of special  type 
of stock , movement of O.D.Cs, out of turn allotments and 
allotment despite restrictions etc.  
VI) Rly Board  Control  on Freight  Operations  
The Railway  Board  provides unity of control  and direction of the freight  
operations . It has the important role of supervision and co -ordination , 
which is very much essential for a big network  like Indian  Railways . The 
Railway Board ’s Control  Office  also remains in contact with the Head 
Quarters  (Central  Control) of the Z onal Head Quarters and watches 
loading  and movement of important streams of traffic  like coal, raw 
material  for steel plants (iron ore), food grains, cement, fertilizers, POL, 
sugar, export ore s, contained traffic  etc., it also watches loading  
interchange power  position, goods  train running  important sections etc to 
ensure that each Railway fulfils  its obligation and opt imises the use of 
various assets , the items watched are more or less the same as those 
watched by the Zonal Head Quarters in respect of the Divisions , but the 
perspective is wider. Railway Board plays an important coordinat ing role 
between various Railways  and other Central Government  Departments  
and vital sectors of economy  connected with Railway, policy  formulation 
and planning , which have important bearing on freight  operations  is also 
one of the major  function of the Railway Board.  
VII) Some Indices  of Freight  Operation and Efficiency : 
The important operating statistics, most of which are indices  of operating 
efficiency , have been discussed in detail later in this manual  (Operating  
Statistics ). Some indices  of freight  operations  and efficiency  are 
highlighted below:  
a) Wagon  holding,  
b) Interchange  balance ,  
c) Load of trains , 
d) Loading  and unloading ,  
e) Empty Running ,  
f) Dispatch in block  rakes ,  
g) Long distance trains ,  
h) Wagon  Turn Round,              
i) Detention  to Trains and Wagons   
Railway Audit Manual  
 
311 
For internal use of IA&AD  j) Engine  Utilisation.  
VIII) Staff  Supervisions:  
Excellence in freight  operations  requires that the staff  offer their willing 
cooperation. To ac hieve this proper training  for constantly developing the 
knowledge , skills and commitment is essential.  
IX) Targets and Statistics : 
One of the important means to utilise fully and efficiently the existing 
carrying capacity of a Railway  is to set measurable and specific targets  
for the various performances after taking into consideration all the local  
conditions. Once the targets  are laid  down, all possible efforts must be 
made to attain them. The targets  are reviewed constantly with a view to 
improving the performance  further.  
Wagon  Census  on Broad  Gauge :  Wagon Census is conducted every year for 
coaching  and goods  stock . It is separately conducted for coaching  and goods , 
separately for BG and MG.  A census  meeting is held prior to the official census  
day. CFTM  holds the census  meeting for goods  wagon  which will be attended by 
the divisional  officers and inspectors. Census in -charge is nominated and their 
names and instructions  are published. Generally CTNCs , SMs , GDs, CYMs  are 
nominated for looking after the proper enumeration of wagons . 
Crew  Links, Loco  Links and Power  Plan   
a) Running  staff (Loco  Pilots ) review is carried out every six months; 
i.e. 1st April and 1st October by the Power  Officers i.e. Sr.  DME /Sr. 
DEE  of the division. After obtaining associate finance vetting and 
DRM ’s approval  these proposals are sent to HQRs for further scrutiny 
by the JA Grade  Officers Evaluation  Committee . 
b) Review of Loco  Pilot (Goods ): For calculating the requirement of 
Loco Pilot (Goods) the total number of working hours logged by Loco 
Pilot (Goods) is calcula ted and then the Preparation  of Driver’s Links, 
Locomotive  Links and Power  Plan (Power requirement) is done.  
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS WITH RESPECT TO THE 
ACTIVITIES  
Risk analysis  of Operating  Department  should be carried out on the basis of the 
following parameters  -  
I) Significance of operating activities in train operations  
II) Financial  materiality viz. Quantum  of expenditure  
III) Complexity of activities  
IV) IT applications  used in the Operating  department  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
312 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Audit  percepti on based on media  coverage, complaints  and issues raised 
in Parliament  etc. 
VI) Past Audit  coverage  
Major  Indices  of Train  Operations  and Efficiency  also help us identify the 
quantum of the risk  as under -  
I) Operating  ratio 
II) Punctuality  
III) Vehicle  Kilometres per Vehicles Day  
IV) Wagon  Holding   
V) Interchange  Balance    
VI) Load of trains    
VII) Loading  and Unloading   
VIII) Empty Running    
IX) Dispatch in Block  Rakes   
X) Long Distance Trains   
XI) Wagon  Turn Round (WTR ) 
XII) Detention  to Trains and Wagons  
XIII) Engine  Utilisation   
XIV)  Average  Speed  of Goods  Trains  
To sum -up the RISK  PARAMETERS identi fied may also include  -  
I) Lack  of optimal  use of available resources  such as locomotives , Rolling  
stock , track , signalling  and telecomm unication  equipment  and manpower  
etc. 
II) Non-planning  for additional  line/track  and rolling stock  capacities based 
on realistic traffic  forecasts.  
III) Compromising Quality  of service  in: 
a) Passenger  Train  Operations  like Improper Time -Tabling, Non -
Punc tuality  of passenger  carrying trains , Inadequate and improper 
accommodation for passengers  to travel and not ensuring Safety  of 
passengers etc.  
b) Goods  Train  Operation by Delaying, irregular and non -assured supply  
of proper type of wagons  for loading  and delayed, non -assured, and 
unsafe transit of goods . 
IV) Lack  of identificati on of business opportunities through market studies.  
V) Lack  of defining and determining product design  and product mix for 
freight  and passenger  segments through close inter action with 
customers /markets.  
VI) Non-determination of appropriate  cost of different product and services.  
VII) Poor recommendations  for pricing of different product and service s. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
313 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) Non-maximization of loading  by prompt supply  of wagons . 
IX) Inability to attract high  rated and high  yielding traffic . 
X) Laxity in ensuring Safety . 
XI) Issues  regarding Cadre  Management  of operating and Control  Staff  
XII) Issues  regarding office Establishment , Training  of Oper ating  Staff .  
XIII) Matter of processing of procurement  of store  viz. stock  and Non  stock  
items.  
XIV)  Matters of Crew  management  (Guards ) and Roster  of guards  
XV) Management  of Goods  wagons  distribution . 
XVI)  Recovery  of license fee and other charges  due from refreshment rooms 
contractors / vehicular traffic  contractors . 
XVII)  Recovery  of Rent  for plots let out to outsiders  
XVIII)  Matter pertaining to Management   and Position of dead  stock  
XIX)  Issues  regarding Estimation  of Damages  to stock  due to careless and 
rough shunting .  
XX) Performance  indices  which are worked out periodically and annually.    
XXI)  Freight  traffic — Originating  tonnage  of revenue -earning freight  traffic  by 
broad  commodity  groups, Earning per million tones of originating traffic  
by selected commodities . 
a) Wagons — 
i. Wagon  kilometre s per wagon  day. 
ii. Net Tonne kilometre s per wagon  day. 
iii. Wagon  turn-round (time  elapsed between successive loadings of 
a single wagon ).  
iv. Detentions to wagons  in important marshallin g yards . 
v. Percentage of loaded to total wagon  kilometrage.  
vi. Net tone kilometres moved per annum per tonne of wagon  
capacity.  
b) Train  operation — 
i. Average  speed  of goods  trains , traction wise.  
ii. Average  load of goods  trains , gross and net in terms of wagons , 
traction wise.  
iii. Punctuality  of Mail  and Express and other passenger  trains . 
c) Rolling  Stock  repairs . 
d) Percentage of under and awaiting repairs -locomotives , coac hes and 
wagons . 
6. COMPUTERIZED APPLICATION SOFTWARE  
Which would aid in audit  of the various activities of departments  concerned.  
 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
314 
For internal use of IA&AD  IT Related Initiatives taken for Railway  Operations :- 
I) Freight  Operations  Information  System (FOIS) which includes RMS  and  
TMS  
II) Crew Management System (CMS )  
III) Integrated  Coaching Management  System (ICMS ) including COIS  
IV) Control  Office  Application (COA ) 
V) E-Procurement  System (EPS ) including eAuction  and Reverse  Auction  
VI) NTES  
VII) (SATSaNG ) 
VIII)  Other software  applications likely to be used for better train operation 
include, Locomotive  Management  System (LMS ), Freight  Maintenance  
Module  (FMM ), Software for Electric  Locomotive Asse t Management 
(SLAM ), Integrated  Material  Management System (iMMS ), Freight 
Maintenance Module (FMM), Track  Management System (TMS ), Works  
Program Manageme nt System, Case Monitoring System for OSD /PRI, 
Rly Bd, Call & Appointment Management System (CAMS ) for MR, e -
Drishti , SECROADS  – E Working AMC ,  TDMS  – Traction  Distribution 
Management System, Signaling  Maintenance Management System, Real -
time Train Information  System, Upgradation of Network Management 
System (NMS ) for UTN  and F OISnet , Master Data Management Project, 
Computerization of Train Signal Registers, Safety  Information 
Management System, Automatic Identification of Rolling  Stock  using 
RFID .  
(Also refer Para  23 of Chapter 5 of Audit Quality  Management  Framework  
(AQMS ) 
6.1  Freight  Operations  Information  System  (FOIS ) 
I) Started in the year 1994 under control  of CAO /FOIS /NDLS.  
II) FOIS  is a computerized  data collection system  with instant access to real 
time status of consignments  in transit.  
III) FOIS  is an ‘On -Line Real Time’ system  based on absolute current  state 
of Art Technology  and efficient Communication  system . 
IV) A management  tool to optimize utilization of costly assets  and resources  
by improving the distribution  of Rakes / wagons , Scheduling and Routing  
Traffic . 
V) Provides continuous Cargo Visibility and enables the Freight  customers  
to have instant access to information regarding the current  status of their 
consignments  in transit for just in time  inventory . 
VI) It captures details of with a friendly cust omer  based  system  - Freight -
Demand , Loading , Transit  and Delivery . 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
315 
For internal use of IA&AD  Benefits: Rake  based consignment tracking and pipeline, Invoice  based loading , 
Originating  Tonnage and Revenue , Information  on trains  on the run , the ETA at 
next point and the work  to be performed, Vehicle  guidance  of all trains  on run , 
Trains, Stock  and Wagon  wise interchanges, Optimized Asset  utilization, 
Locomotive  utilization by reducin g L/E running , Statement of missing  or 
wrongly delivered wagons , Elimination of unconnected wagons , Reduced 
locomotive  power  and rolling stock  maintenance  cost, Savings in Time and Cost 
of handling in yards  cost of empty  haulage , Ensures optimal crew management  
and monitors statutory  limits for running  duty and overtime  payments, and 
Reduction in staff  cost per unit  of transportation due to improved productivity  of 
the available manpower . 
Improved customer  service  and satisfaction:  Quick settlement of  Claims , Just 
in time  inventory  and E -commerce.  
Goods  shed operation : Arrival  particulars of  Wagons , Placement and Release  
Particulars, Information  on demands registered and pending  indents , Prepara tion 
of RR , Information on demurrage  and Wharfage , Goods shed earnings  and 
Information on delayed wagons  and wagons  awaiting Placement / Releas e. 
Scope of FOIS  systems: The entire gamut of FOIS has been classified  into 
various sub systems for formulating MIS reports  and queries and its own 
information.  
6.1.1  Rake  Management  System  (RMS ) 
I) RMS  has been provided in yards , interchange points and also divisional  
control  offices for proxy reporting and generation of various operating  
reports. 
II) In RMS  rakes  are formed and inconsistencies reported  
III) The rake  is offered for TXR  examination.  
IV) CC and premium rakes  are given colour tags to identify the rakes  in 
FOIS  system  
   Important Outputs: - 
I) Daily  position and Loading  performance  at a glance.  
II) Terminal detention  and detention  of individual  Rakes. 
III) Detention  at Yard /Crew  Booking  points.  
IV) Rake  at Odd hours and Forecast /Summary, Interchange  Forecast.  
V) Section  wise HOR and Spe ed for all  trains . 
VI) Commodity  wise Outstanding . 
VII) Y-Day Loading  and Interchange  of CC  Rakes.  
VIII) Pipe line  of Terminating  loads  
IX) Equipment  failures.  
X) Performance  of type -wise wagons  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
316 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Availability of Loco -Pilots  and Guards . 
XII) Loco  Performance . 
XIII) Shed wise Loco  Holding in Foreign  Railways . 
XIV)  Shed/Service  wise loco  details.  
XV) Divisional  Loco  detentions.  
XVI)  Shed and Territorial  Outage.  
XVII)  Net Outage.  
XVIII)  It enables accounting of EKM  per Engine  Day.  
XIX)  It has also started to issue  Computerised Vehicle  Guidance (VGs) from 
TXR  examination points.  
XX) RMS  has been integrated  with COA . 
XXI)  Web Reports  through FOIS  and Internet  has been made available and  
provides message sending to all Stations, Divisional  and Zonal  
Headquarters  of IR. 
6.1.2 Terminal Management  System  (TMS ) 
I) Terminal Management  System  (TMS ) captures freight  transactions at  
individual terminals  for computerized  preparation of commercial  
documents  such as RRs , ODR etc.  
II) It helps in accounting of Railway  freight  earnings . 
III) Non TMS  freight  terminals  are also captured for FOIS  by nearest TMS  
locations.  
 The TMS  locations which are V -SAT based have the following features  –  
Issuing of Computerized  RRs for Outward  Rakes, Train  running  position and 
loading  details, Freight  details: Station /Division /Zone Wise., Demand  and 
Outstanding  priority wise, Consignment delivery book details, Vehicle  Guidance 
(VGs) for rakes  from Non -RMS  locations, Commercial  circulars  and location, 
FOIS  Messages with any location in Indian  Railways  and Web -enabled Claims  
Application  software  accessible to Claim Officers  
6.2  Crew  Management  System  (CMS ) 
Crew  management  system  is designed to provide information regarding the crew 
round the clock. It provides information regarding the presence of crew at home  
station or out station, maintains status -wise records, assigns crew to the trains , 
maintains information regarding the periodic and other rests, Road  Learning, 
Traction  Knowledge , Training  Scheduling, PME , DAR  actions etc.  
Crew  management  system  has been developed with the following objectives : 
Optimum  utilization of crew by maintaining updated inventory  of crew at home  
stations  and at out stations, Scheduling and assigning the most suitable crew to a 
train after keeping in view the vari ous factors like the type of traction required 
sections to be covered  etc, To ensure timely availability of required crew, user 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
317 
For internal use of IA&AD  can monitor/view various road learning and other training  schedules, due dates 
of promotions/re fresher courses for crew operating a certain locomotive  of all 
traction and gauges, Scheduling periodic rests of the crew based on the total duty  
hours calculated from the beginning of the present fortnight, Serve as a tool to 
call crew automatically, Calculate and monitor crew productivity  by calculating 
total hours of duty worked, mileage  earned etc, Monitor 10 Hrs duty and HOER  
rules  by providing prior informa tion of the crew and past trend analysis  of the 
sections, To keep a check and control  payment for over time  and other allowances  
and Act  as a tool to make the crew lobbies mo re or less paperless . 
6.3 Control  Office  Application  (COA ) 
Control  Office  Application  started in the year 2008 and has been comm issioned 
in the Control Offices at various levels. Control Office Application (COA ) is 
comprehensive software  for the automation of Control Charting at a Railway  
divisional  control  office. COA is intended to replace the tedious manual  plotting 
of running  trains  on a chart. The core functionality of the control  charting with 
ergonomics is intended to provide the Traffi c Controllers good look -and- feel and 
user-friendly work  environment. The benefits of COA include - better planning  
and decision -making in train operations  and thus contribute to increased 
operational  efficiency . 
COA  is designed to form the core application  to drive the existing allied systems 
like FOIS . NTES  and COIS . The integration w ith allied systems will be facilitated 
through a Central  Application  Server at CRIS .  The flow of data on real time  basis 
to adjoining divisions  marks a significant breakthroug h in the train operations  
without dependency on human interference.  
COA  covers the following core functionalities Control  Office  Operations . They 
include: - 
Train  Ordering, Maintain Train  Information , Manage Train Movement (Abnormal 
Working, Stabling , Banker  Movement), Report  Unusual  Occurrences, Management  
of Maintenance  Blocks, Caution  Orders, Plot  Graph, Advance  Plotting System  
/Manual , Maintain referential  data, MIS Reports , Yard  Management  Siding , 
Miscellaneous  Functions, View Station  Layout.  
The application  will have interfacing capability with Data  Logger to capture data 
pertaining to train movements in the final version of the product.  . 
Intende d Audience are Operations  Managers , Train  Controllers, Key functionaries of 
sister departments . 
Benefits:   Fully Automated work  environment, As an aid to the controller  in terms 
of efficiency , precision and time management , Leverage to Controller 's Experience 
in decision making through manual  forecast , Real  time information on train 
operation  without human dependence and To serve as a backbone  system  for 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
318 
For internal use of IA&AD  sharing of data between allied systems.  
6.4 Integrated  Coaching  Management  System  (ICMS ) 
Integrated  Coaching  Management  System  (ICMS ) is a critical IT  application  
which comp uterises the whole coaching  operations  of Indian  Railways  and has 
different modules  to cater to Railway  requirements for day to day operational  
activities, maintaining computerised records of various events and 
functionalities. Besides, it ensures monitoring  and management  of passenger  
carrying vehicles, other coaching  vehicles and passenger  locomotives ; and 
generation of MIS reports  for decision making and to ensure optimum  utilisation 
of resources . 
ICMS  was dev eloped with the following objectives : 
Monitor punctuality  of Mail  Express/Passenger  trains , Monitor status of coaching  
stock  in real time  and online , Facilitate augmentation of train composition on the 
basis of traffic  demand to maximize revenue, Facilitate planning  and running  of 
special  trains , Set Bench mark for Asset  Maintenance , Plan  timely maintenance  
schedule  including IOH /POH  to minimize idling of coaches  outside shop , Prompt 
planning  for idle coaches  and their timely booking  and usage to generate more 
revenue to the Railways , to avoid manual  manipulation and to provi de fool proof 
service  to enhance the image of Railways and To provide MIS for coaching  
operations  
An Overview of Modules in ICMS  
6.4.1 Punctuality  Module  (PAM ) 
For Post  facto analysis  of punctuality  loss and its causes (not an on -line system ), 
PAM  Captures train running  at Originating / Terminating and interchange points 
and the causes of detention . Data  input predominantly at Divisional  HQ level.  
6.4.2 Coaching  Operations  Inform ation  System  (COIS ): 
COIS  Captures events on Coaches /Rakes, Generates Reports  for Management  of 
Coaching  Stock . Data input predominantly at Station /Coaching Yard  level.  
6.4.3 COIS  Data  Entry Module : 
Support module  of ICMS , to maintain database pertaining to the information of 
Rake  Links, Yard  Infrastructure , Coach  Master , Train  Schedules  etc. Data  input 
at Zonal  HQlevel.  
6.4.4 Coaching  Maintenance  Module  
To capture depot  activities related to coaching  maintenance  operations , Utility 
tool for managers looking after mec hanical and electrical maintenance , Includes 
module  for Material  Management  and Manpower  data (gang strength  per shifts 
etc), Data  input a t CDO  level.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
319 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.4.5 Time -tabling  Module  
For simulating the suitable timings for running  of all kinds of trains , simulating 
the best available path for planning  a train  keeping in view all variables, 
simulating optimum  utilization of rake  link, generating all time -tabling  
documents . Data  input at Zonal  HQ level.  
ICMS -System  Architecture  
User connects through browser interface  (like Internet  Explorer), Separate  URL 
for PAMS, COIS  and DATA modules , Users have Thin clients at location and 
Back -end: RDBMS (Oracle based) ICMS -Data Feeding  
Master  Data : Common Master database for PAMs and COIS , includes 
Infrastructure  data: (of more permanent  nature like List  of Stations, Platforms, 
washing  lines) and Other Master Data: (of less permanent nature like Rake  Link 
Data, Time Table data, Coach  Master etc.) 
Running  Data : Separate  and independent  running  database for PAMS and COIS  
I)  PAM :  Feeding mostly at divisional  level, Interch ange  owning division 
controls the data feeding for handing over or taking over, Zonal  client 
does the responsibility fixing (deciding the trains  "lost in punctuality ") 
Activi ties include: Originating  terminating, interchange timings, Detention  
Reports  and Cause wise logging, Fixing Responsibility of Running  Data. 
II) COIS :   Unlike PAM  - no concept of data "feeding" in COIS. Instead 
working on the system  at station/yard  level leads to generation of 
required data (and memos for the operator).This works  as input for M IS. 
All station/yard  activities from arrival to departure of rake  are captured:  
Yard  stock  entry  Dispute Resolve  
Yard  Position  Sick Marking  
Rake  formation  Sicklin e Placement Sickline Operation  
Modify consist  Shop  Marking  
Movement  Shop  Placement  
Movement (Yard  to yard ) Remove fit available coaches  
Rake  Examination  Search  Feedbacks  
Departure  Reporting  Send Feedbacks  
En route  Attachments/Detachments  Generate memo  
Arrival  Reporting  Dispute Resolve  
6.4.6  ICMS -MIS -Reports  
I) PAM :Reports  for Management  at Divisional  Level, HQ level, Board  level  
like: Railway  Punctuality  Performance  for a date for a Division , Movement 
of Trains (Division wise) in a Zone , Punctuality percentage  of Mail/Express , 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
320 
For internal use of IA&AD  Cause wise/Gauge  Wise breakup of Lost Trains between  dates , Division 
wise analysis  of Cause of Lost Trains on Date in a Zone, Railway 
Punctuality performance  for a date in a Zone , Cause wise breakup of Trains 
lost in a period , Summary of Monitored trains  daily Run and Lost, Section  
wise/Cause wise analysis  for all trains  on a date, and Zone wise/Cause wise 
analysis  for all trains  on a date,  etc.  
II) COIS : Reports  for Ma nagement  at Station  Level, Divisional  Level, HQ, 
RB level like: Yard  Stock  Position (Line  position), Vehicle  Guidance, Zonal  
Stock Balance  sheet (type wise details of Bare Requirement, allotment, 
running  in service , ineffective etc), Coaches  on way from/to shop , Foreign  
Railway  Coaches, Ineffective Coaches, Coach  History , and Rake  Link 
Information  Zonal/Divisional Coaching  Stock allotment/availability, etc.  
6.5 E-Procurement  System (EPS ) including eAuction  and Reverse  Auction  
The site provides a secure platform to users for online  transactions for 
procurement  and sale. The site caters to requirements of all 16 Zonal Rlys. and 6 
Production  Units apart from RCF /RBL, RDSO , NF/Const. and Railtel . Site  can 
be used for material procurement by COS /PCE of Zonal Railways  and COS of 
Production Units.  COS of zonal Railways and production  Units can also use the 
website for Auction  of scrap  and unserviceable materials.  
6.6 NTES    
National Train Enquiry  System (NTES ) is railways' back -end system which 
provides information to the public about train schedules on a near real time basis 
through various interfaces like nationwide un ique rail enquiry number 139, 
website (trainenquiry.com), mobile interfaces, touch screens, enquiry counters 
and display boards at stations  
6.7 Software Aided Train Scheduling and Network Governance (SATSaNG ) 
6.7.1 Fixed Infrastructure  Resources Module  (FIRM)  
The Infrastructure  Module  will have information on the fixed infrastructure  and 
definitions required for assignment of  train services. All information on tracks 
and signaling  will be used to determine the appropriate definitions for conflict 
free assignment of fixed infrastructure resources . The user interface will include 
a view of the I R network  map.  
6.7.2 Rolling  Assets Module  (RoAM)  
The rolling assets resources  module will handle all the mobile resources, the 
rakes, the locomotive and the running  staff. The rule s for utilizing these resources 
will be handled within this module.  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
321 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.7.3 Scheduling Module  for Allocation  of Resources to Trains (SMART ) 
6.7.4 Publish Report and Exchange Supporting System (PRESS ) 
The publishing module will contain all the output  from the scheduling module 
and publish it to the other applications like COA , ICMS , PRS , NTES , and CMS . 
This module will also be used to publish hard copies of the time table in the 
format specified by the user.  
6.7.5 Freight  Type Unscheduled Trains & Utilization of Resources Estimation 
(FUTURE ) 
The capacity module will take all passenger train sched ules as fixed and can be 
used to identify potential freight paths. Further this module will have the 
capability of building in “what if” scenarios.  
6.7.6 Simulation  Module  and Run Time Estimation Reports (SMaRTER ) 
The simulation module will contain three elements; the train performance  or run 
time calculator, the sectional simulation tool and the terminal simulation tool.  
6.7.7 Demand Evaluation Module  to Assist in New Design  of Services 
(DEMANDS ) 
The Demands Module  will contain analysis of the data from the Passenger 
Reservation System (PRS ) and Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS ).  
Thus with the use of (SATSaNG ) the  Track , rolling stock, locomotives and crew 
are all assigned to train services as per a time schedule in the system such that 
assignment of these resources  has to be unique such that no resources has a dual 
claim on it at any point of time.  
7. COMPREHENSIVE AUDIT  CHECKLIST  
For check of various activities being performed by the Department  including 
General  Checklist as well as activity specific check list.  
Audit  of Apex  Units  - Check  Lists of Directorates  of Railway  Board  and 
Units of Zonal  Railway.  
7.1  Railway  Board  Level  
I) Items to be seen during the Inspection  of the office of Traffic  
Transportation  Directorate  
a) TT-I 
i. Cement traffic . Review of statistics related t o the cement traffic  
ii. RDSO . 
iii. Minutes  of the Meetings of Mineral Advisory Board  
iv. RTCs for movement of all commodities  except coal and POL  
v. Movement of departmental  wagons /departmental  materials  issues, 
policies and review of related statistics  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
322 
For internal use of IA&AD  vi. Traffic  blocks . 
vii. PCDOs of both GMs/PCOMs  
viii. Inspection  notes  of Board  Members /AM/EDs/Directors  
ix. Staff  related matters.  
x. Coordination  work  related to misc. meetings related to traffic  
department  
xi. Policy  issues pertaining to Konkan  Railway  
xii. Policy  issues related to FOIS  
xiii. Military movement and policies (MILRAIL ) 
xiv. Ports.  
xv. Planning  related issues handled by the Traffic  Transportation  
Directorate .   
xvi. Higher axle  load.  
xvii. Review of Asset  management  and related statistics including 
production , cond emnation, POH /ROH  of wagons /loco . 
xviii. Traffic  related to Lime and limestone other than those meant for steel 
plants.  
xix. Answers to the Parliament  Questions on above including e arning 
from rake  points, block  rakes , goods  rakes , Freight  Terminals , 
Railways  operating assets . 
b) TT-II 
i. Liquid traffic  moving in tank wagons  except cement, fly ash etc.  
ii. RTC  related to POL traffic  - proposals of new  sidings  
iii. Assessment  of rolling stock  (tank wagons ) for provision in the 
annual  rolling stock  programmes on additional  account . 
iv. Authorized loads of POL goods  trains  
v. Matter pertaining to tank wagons  
vi. Clearance of pipeline projects  
vii. Review of Proposals for new  POL sidings  
viii. Review of Calibration of various types of tank wagons  
ix. JCM, PNM  and PREM  items.  
c) TT-III/ Desk -I 
i. Movement of salt – edible, industrial  
ii. Rationalisation  scheme  
iii. Traffic  Transportation  shield  
iv. Preparation  of list of Two poi nt combination etc.  
v. Review of Court  cases  
vi. Review of outstanding  Audit  Paras  and C&AG  meeting and 
reports  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
323 
For internal use of IA&AD  vii. Ores, Iron and Steel  traffic , Movement of RMSP , Export ore etc, 
Personal  effects, P&T stores , bone and bone meals, rubber goods , 
Machinery  and Steel furniture  and Electric  Appliances.  
viii. Railway  Reform Committee  
ix. Public  Accounts  Committee  
x. Estimates  Committee  
xi. Issues  of Railway  Conven tion Committee  
xii. Matters of Traffic  planning  and Five Year  Plan etc. 
d) TT-III/ Desk -II 
i. Preferential Traffic  Order  
ii. Foodgrain/pulses m ovement incl. export  
iii. Movement of livestock, fodder, jute products.  
iv. Container  traffic  including Double  Stack Container.  
v. Movement of all relief  materials . 
vi. Cases related to "Rig ht to Information  Act" by DTT/POL.  
vii. Outcome of Meetings of various Committees incl. High  Powered 
Price Monitoring  Board  in Cabinet  Secretariat.  
viii. Issue s related to the sponsoring authorities  for movement of goods  
in higher priority  
ix. Public  Distribution  System  
x. Medicines , drugs and glucose W ine and spirit, Tea and coffee, 
Empty barrels and containers, Hides and skins  
e) TT-III/ Desk -III 
i. Fertilisers, Potatoes, Onions, Spices like jeera, garlics etc.  
ii. Paper incl. raw material  to paper mills Soap and soap stone  
iii. Nepal and Bhutan Traffic  
f) TT-III/ Desk -IV 
i. Sugar, sugarcane, jaggery etc., Oil in drums and tins   (indigenous 
only) Timber, firewood and charcoal, Exhibition goods , 
Alumin ium incl. raw material  to alumin ium in dustry , Glass incl. 
raw materials  to glass industry , Refractories incl. raw materials  to 
refractories, Tobacco and tobacco products, Stone and boulders, 
Non ferrous metals, m ica, zinc copper etc., Chemicals, detonators 
for mining, firewood, Other misc. goods , Myrobalan, Railway  
materials , Oilseeds and oil cakes, Cotton, wool, textiles including 
raw, material  for textile mills.  
ii. Export of above noted commodities  
iii. Activities  of Nodal  branch for Bangladesh Railway  
 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
324 
For internal use of IA&AD  g) TT-IV 
i. Operational and other Indo -Pak traffic  incl. parliame ntary  
questions , call references , 
ii. Freight  Train  Operations , Originating , Freight loading  targets , 
Performance  and Measures for achieving target, Operating  
Efficiency , Monthly  Operating Review, Freight performance  of 
KRCL  - related issues and poli cies 
iii. PCOM 's/CFTMs conference -related issues  
iv. President , PM , MR , CRB , MT and associated offices excluding 
Inspection  notes . 
v. Review of Perform ance review of zonal Railways , brief for Board  
vi. Assessment  of rolling stock  for provision in the annual  rolling 
stock  programme  as well as Plan  periods on additional  account  
except tank wagons . 
vii. Indents - incl. outstanding  indents  etc. 
viii. Accident  cases (recommendations  of CRS /CCRS  and CCRS's, 
reports  on safety  matters),   safety in train operations . 
ix. Zonal  Railway  traffic  and maintenance  of related statistics  
x. Review of Issues /policies related to quota /restrictions and 
maintenance  of related statistics  
xi. Parliament  questions  on above including booking  and 
transportations of goods , working capacity of goods  trains . 
h) TT-V 
i. Coal traffic . 
ii. RTC  related to coal traffic  
iii. Periodical  reports  for Cabinet  
II) Coaching  Directorate  
a) COACHING  
Review of the following activities -  
i. All references  regarding introduction/ extension/augmentation of 
trains /increase in frequency  of trains , change in timings of trains , 
acceleration, provision/curtailment of halts and of connections of 
junctions, pertaining to all In dian Railways  (All Zonal  Railways  
including Konkan  Railway ), detention  to road traffic  at level 
crossings  (station limits) and punctuality  performance  of 
particular trains . 
ii. Running  of circular /EMU /DMU  trains  (Suburban  Services ). 
iii. Links/changes in roster duty  of Guards . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
325 
For internal use of IA&AD  iv. Redressal  of Public  Grievances  pertaining to Coaching  including 
references  received from President ’s Secretariat, PM  Secretariat, 
etc. 
v. Collection  of the data and material  pertaining to running  of trains  
of All Zonal  Railways  for holding Indian  Railway  Time Table 
Committee  Meeting . All issues related to Train  At Glance and its 
distribution . 
vi. Coachi ng Stock  Management  matters relating to RSP (coaches ). 
vii. Requirement of coaches , Production  Plan of PCVs and OCVs.  
viii. Allotment  of different type of coaches  from production  
programme  to Zonal  Railways  as per their demand and 
availability.  
ix. Marshal ling of coaches  in trains  (Including earmarked coaches ) 
Policy . 
x. Movement of milk tankers in piecemeal form and CRS  sanction 
for running  of special  type of coaches . 
xi. Shifting of primary maint enance  and secondary maintenance  of 
trains  and Conversion  of coaches  into Departmental  Stock  and 
NMG.  
xii. Augmentation of load of train s. 
xiii. Allotment  of inspection  carriages /saloons . 
xiv. Withdrawal  of coaches  from poorly patronized trains . 
xv. Provision  of stoppages of important trains  like Rajdhani , Yuva, 
Shatabdi , Duronto, policy  matters regarding stoppages, review 
etc. 
xvi. Budgetary  works  pertaining to in troduction, extension and 
increase in frequency  of Budget  and non -Budget trains . 
b) PUNCTUALITY CELL  
Review of the following activities -  
i. All cases related to punctuality  and factors affectin g punctuality.  
ii. All correspondence related to punctuality  within the 
organization /other organization.  
iii. Punctuality  drives.  
iv. All issue  and correspondence related to COA  and ICMS . 
v. All issues related to rescheduling, diversion, short termination and 
cancellation  etc. 
vi. Issues  related to policy , requirement and review of coaching  loco 
links and guard and crew links or passenger  carrying trains . 
vii. All proposals related to traffic  blocks  and Non  Interlock working.  
viii. Movement of Parcel  Vans and its maintena nce. 
ix. Policy  of Postal  Van requirement.  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
326 
For internal use of IA&AD  x. Loading /unloading  of RBI  currency . 
xi. Recommendation of Commissioner  for Railway  Safety  on 
accident  related matters.  
xii. All public  grievance cases related to Punctuality . 
xiii. Policy  regarding speed  limit in Elephant corridors . 
xiv. Naming of trains  (existing or new  introduced) and all other related 
matters.  
c) COACHING  MOVEMENT CELL  
Review of the following activities -  
i. Day-to-day monitoring  of new  built c oaches  turned out from RCF , 
ICF and BEML by keeping constant co -ordination  with officials 
from Production  Units . 
ii. Day-to-day monitoring  of dispa tch of new  built coaches  to owning 
Railways  and their arrival at owning Railways, arrangement of 
coaches  for new  services etc.  
iii. Maintenance  of record regarding new  built coaches  turned out 
from Production  Units . 
iv. Monitoring  of transfer (permanent /temporary) of coaches  ordered 
by Railway  Board and balancing of coaches  between various 
Railways . 
v. Day-to-day attachment of extra coaches  in different trains  for 
clearance of rush as per demand received from Commerc ial 
Directorate  and also on Full Tariff  Rates . 
vi. Planning  and arranging of special  trains  and special  coaches  for 
movement of troops.  
vii. Co-ordination  with officials of Central  Police  Forces (BSF, CRPF, 
CISF, ITBP, SSB and State  Armed Forces) regarding demand of 
coaches /specials before and after any Elections.  
viii. Arranging coaches  and rakes  for special  trains  during and after 
Elections.  
ix. Monitoring  of running  of special  train carry ing Central  Police  
Forces and Election officials during and after Elections and also 
during emergency  moves.  
x. Finalization of operational  itineraries for Special  trains  e.g. 
Luxury Tourist Trains (POW, RROW, Deccan Odyssey, Golden 
Chariot, IRCTC  Maharaja Trains, Buddhist Train ) Exhibition 
Trains (Science Express, Red Ribbon Express, Sanskriti 
Exhibition Train, Vivekananda Exhibition  Train, Mother Express 
Exhibition train, Technology  Express, etc) running  from time  to 
time. 
xi. Arrangement of rakes  for the Exhibition specials.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
327 
For internal use of IA&AD  xii. Arranging and managing conference  of CPTM /Dy.COM/STM 
level in course of preparations for movement of the special  trains . 
xiii. Monitoring  of running  of the exhibition specials.  
7.2 Zonal  Level 
7.2.1  PCOM  (Principal  Chief  Operations  Manager ) 
Items to be seen during the Inspection  of the office of PCOM  
I) Issues  of Traff ic planning ,  
II) Issues  pertaining to Freight  train operation ,  
III) Issues  pertaining to Passenger  train operation   
IV) Issues  of operating safety ,  
V) Issues  of non -compliance  of policies and guidelines  laid down by the Railway  
Board  (Ministry  of Railways ).   
VI) Details of amendment, framing and enforcement of subsidiary  rules  of the zonal 
Railway .  
VII) Details of work  done as revising authority  for oper ating, operating running  and loco  
running  staff. 
VIII) Details of various meetings as and when asked by competent  authority . 
IX) Analysis  of Coordination  with different departments  for early disposal  of the 
files and letters.  
X) Review of various letters and circulars  addressed to PCOM . 
XI) Review of meeting paper s for PCOM  and CFTM  like Operating  meeting/ Crack 
meeting.  
XII) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XIII) The execution  of powers for discipline and appeal matters as mentioned in DAR  
rules  1968.  
XIV)  Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :-1) ‘Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  ‘ 2) ‘ Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management .’ 3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption. ’) 
XV) Establishment  Matter  
XVI)  Tools  and Plan ts 
XVII)  Imprest  
XVIII)  RTI 
XIX)  Court  Cases etc.  
XX) Sending MCDO  to GM  
XXI)  Sending MCDO  to MT  
XXII)  Reply to General  references  
XXIII)  Reply to Railway  Board ’s references  
XXIV)  Reply to VIP  references  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
328 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXV)  Public  references  
XXVI)  Revenue  Budget   
(Refer Chapter 5 : Financial  Audit  of ‘Regulations  on Audit & Accounts  -2007 .’) 
XXVII)  August Review   
(Refer Chapter 5 : Financial  Audit  of ‘Regulations  on Audit & Accounts  -2007 .’) 
XXVIII)  Revised  Estimate   
(Refer Chapter 5 : Financial  Audit  of ‘Regulations  on Audit & Accounts  -2007. ’) 
XXIX)  Final Modification  
(Refer Chapter  5 : Financial  Audit  of ‘Regulations  on Audit & Accounts  -2007 .’) 
XXX)  Line Capacity statement  
XXXI)  Food grai n loading  
XXXII)  Monthly  appreciation report  
XXXIII)  Monthly  statement No. 14 and 15 (yard  statistics)  
7.2.2  Control  Organization  under Principal  Chief Operations  Manager  of Zonal  
Railway . 
Items to be seen during the Audit  of Chief  Controller  
I) Punctuality  of the mail / express and passenger  trains . 
II) Utilization of the rolling stock  
III) Utilization of the section  capacity speed  of goods  trains . 
IV) Utilizat ion of the train crew.  
Items to be seen in the Traffic  control  (including Central  control  and Emergency  control ) 
at the HQ  level:  
Review  of the fo llowing functions : 
I) CENTRAL CONTROL  
a) Wagons  available in divisions , received and forwarding wagons , 
yard balance  at ZERO hour and figures of wagons  at 24:00 hours i.e. 
clearance.  
b) Data  is made in case of accident  and concerned department’s officer is 
informed.  
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach to 
Performance  Audits).  
c) Keeps a close watch on the relief  trains . 
d) Collection  of figures of received tank wagons  in excess and for 
transhipment . 
e) Collection  of figures of stabled wagons  with description of vehicle  / train.  
f) Analysis  of detention  to trains . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
329 
For internal use of IA&AD  (Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘P roblem Oriented Approach to 
Performance  Audits).  
g) Running  of goods  trains  to their best possible paths.  
h) Elimination of avoidable detention  to goods  stock  at loading  and 
unloading  and Transhipment  sheds . 
i) Allotment  and distribution  of goods  stock  to the Stations.  
j) Arrangement of line  blocks  and to provide maximum  time possible 
for the working of material  trains . 
k) Arrange relief  for crew.  
l) Ensure optimum  utilization of the lo comotives . 
m) Issue  proper instructions  for train working during abnormal working.  
n) Arrange speedy relief  in case of accident . 
o) Help connecting the unconnected wagons . 
p) Ensure correct marshalling  of trains . 
q) Assist in the preparation of timetable in coordination  with neighbouring  
divisions  and Railways . 
r) Advice  stations  and permanent  way staff  regarding weather warning 
to take necessary precautions.  
s) Arrange periodic census . 
II) EMERGENCY CONTROL:  
a) The Chief  of Emergency  Control  Office  is CHC , assisted by Dy.  CHC in 
shifts.  
b) Dy. CHC  prepares figures of passenger  trains  run shift wise and as per the 
direc tives of CHC.  
c) In emergency  control , advance diary is prepared in which special  
instructions  are mentioned. This diary is made date wise in different 
pages.  
d) Maintain punctuality  of all passengers , M/E trains  run. 
e) Inform the running  position of trains  to foreign  Railway  along with 
late running  and also the description of late  running trains  and 
departure time  of trains . 
f) Observe loss  of punctuality  percentage , its causes and posit ion of 
coaching  stock , current  situation of wagons , parcel  vans etc and 
collection of data.  
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach to 
Performance  Audits).  
g) Record of operation  of special  trains , bogies is kept in this office.  
h) Concerned divisions  are informed of passenger  trains and other coaching  
trains . 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
330 
For internal use of IA&AD  i) All the data regarding coaching  such as Fair Special , Summer 
Special, Relief  Special etc is collected.  
7.2.3  CFTM  (Chief Freight  Transportation  Manager ) 
I) Review of matters related to planning  and handling of freight  loading  
and unloading  on Zonal  Railway .  
II) Issues  related to lack of co -ordination  with adjoining Railways  and 
Railway  Board  for freight  movem ent.  
III) Issues  related to lack of co -ordination  and directions for inter divisional  
and inter Railway  movements.  
IV) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
V) Establishment  Matter  
VI) Tools  and Plants  
VII) Imprest  
VIII) RTI 
IX) Court  Cases  
X) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XI) Review of execution  of the powers for discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.4  CPTM  (Chief  Passenger  Transportation  Manager ) 
I) Review of execution  of the general administrative powers as the head  of 
the Coaching  organization ,  
II) Review of the activities of the planning , running  and monitoring  of 
movement related to Mail /Express, Passenger  and Special  trains  on the 
entire Zonal  Railway  along with operating safety .  
III) Review of activities related to the co -ordination  with all the 
divisions /units of Zonal  Railway , adjoining Railways  and Railway 
Board  in connection with the running  of passenger  trains .  
IV) Review of de cisions on the matters pertaining to Time -Tabling,  
V) Review of action  taken for augmentation of coaches  in trains , 
VI) Review of the progress for introductions of new  trains  for which over all 
guidelines  issued by Railway  Board .  
VII) Review of the action  taken on punctuality  i.e. for punctual  running  of 
trains ,  
VIII) Review of results of analysis  of reasons for loss  of punctuality , 
IX) Review of Management  of running  of trains  at the time  of any 
accidents /unusual .  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
331 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) Review of Activities  of Rules  section  and  
XI) Review of man power  planning  in operations  department.  
XII) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Case s of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
XIII) Establishment  Matter  
XIV)  Tools  and Plants  
XV) Imprest  
XVI)  RTI 
XVII)  Court  Cases etc.  
XVIII)  Review of execution  of Powers rega rding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XIX)  The execution  of the powers for discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide  DAR  rules  1968 . 
XX) Review of the Operating  department’s dealing with public  in the form of 
Representations of public  received by the following ways :- 
a) Through  ZRUCC  
b) Consultation with DRUCC , which is held at divisional  level, the 
detailed report, is sent to HQ . 
c) Representation received from MP, MLA, Government  officials and 
public  by any mode.  
7.2.5  CTPM  (Chief  Transport  Planning  Manager ) 
I) Details of approved  and under approval  traffic  facilities wo rks,  
II) Details of infrastructure  developmental activities,  
III) Details of Issues  related to granting of RTC ,  
IV) Position regarding finalization of drawing ,  
V) Detail of activities rega rding transfer and posting of non -gazetted  staff.  
VI) Detail of activities for disposal  of DAR  cases of Gr. ‘C’ staff  of the 
Railway , 
VII) Review of Activities  related to co -ordination  with private  sectors for 
setting up of new  private  Railway  siding for upcoming projects . 
VIII) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
IX) Establishment  Matter  
X) Tools  and Plants  
XI) Imprest  
XII) RTI 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
332 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIII) Court  Cases  
XIV)  Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as pres cribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XV) The powers for discipline and appeal matters as mentioned vide DAR  
rules  1968.  
XVI)  Review of the proposals received from units   
XVII)  Review of the procurement  of furniture .  
(Refer ‘ Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  ‘) 
XVIII)  Review of the Procurement  of petty  Materials    
XIX)  Review of the Procedure  for placing Indents  for freight  loading .  Review 
of the process of  Allotment  of Coaches  and special  trains   
7.2.6  DY. COM (Goods ) 
I) Rationalization  in loco  and crew run . 
II) Optimum  usage of rolling stock . 
III) Freight  operations . 
IV) Crack trains  monitoring . 
V) Performance  of different terminals  as well a s Power  Houses.  
VI) Close co -ordination  with the concerned branch to improve their 
performance . 
VII) Supervision of central  freight  control . 
VIII) CRS  sanct ion of rolling stock . 
IX) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Aud it 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
X) Establishment  Matter  
XI) Tools  and Plants  
XII) Imprest  
XIII) RTI 
XIV)  Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XV) The powers for discipline and appeal matters as mentioned vide DAR  
rules  1968 . 
7.2.7  DY. COM (Coaching ) 
I) Review of activities of Punctuality  and coaching  operation . 
II) Review of Punctuality  matter s including all references  of punctuality ,  
III) Review of replies to Parliament  Questions relating to Punctuality  and 
their disposal . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
333 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Review of MP/MLA’s references  and Public  representation / 
complaints . 
V) Matter of Stores  related works . 
VI) Review of Emergency  Control  and management  thereby . 
VII) Analysis  of Coaching  Conferences . 
VIII) Position of Disposal  of References of MP/MLA’s and public  grievances . 
IX) Issues  related to Speed  Restrictions and references  thereby.   
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach 
to Performance  Audits ). 
X) Analysis  of the review of GR  and SR . 
XI) Issues  of non -compliance  of the safety  inspections . 
XII) Review of records of inspections  conducted by Operating  Officers.  
a) Review  of All work  of Train  Punctuality  Section , MCDO , 
Establishment  matters, VIP  movements and all other matters arising 
from time  – to – time. 
b) Review of Industrial  relations and any other matters arising from 
time – to – time. 
c) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for 
Audit of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on 
Role of Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
d) Establishment  Matters  
e) Tool s and Plants  
f) Imprest  
g) RTI 
h) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as 
prescribed  in SOPEST . 
i) The powers for discipline and appeal matter s as mentioned vide 
DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.8  DY. COM (FOIS ) 
I) Analysis  of monitoring  and lia ison with Divisional  and Zonal  Authorities 
of Civil /Optg., S&T  and Electrical  staff for timely preparation of sites and 
electrical fittings  etc. at locations over the Zonal Railways . 
II) Review of progress of works  and their commissioning  as per target laid  
down by CAO /FOIS  and Railway  Board  and liaison  with Divisional  
authorities  and DOT  to ensure timely availability of Railway/BSNL  
channels upto specified locations.  
III) Review of issues  regarding IRCOT /CRIS /FOIS  Telecom  in 
commissioning  of FOIS terminals  as well as implementation  of 
FOIS/ICMS /TMS /COA /CMS  and other related systems.  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
334 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Issues  pertaining to data feeding in all the divisions  being done to see 
whether they are done timely on real time  basis.  
V) Analysis  of Matters pertaining to display of correct figures of 
Divisional /Zonal /Interchange  points on computer  and sorting out of 
discrepancies noticed.  
VI) Review of the issue  and compl iance  of instructions  issued by FOIS  central  
organization  by divisional  offices.  
VII) Review of the system  of properly trained staff  being worked properly on 
FOIS /terminals  in HQ  and divisional  offices and arrangement for training  
of staff  in consultation with CPM /FOIS.  
VIII) Revi ew of the functioning of the system  in the Zone being done with the 
help of Dy.CNM  and sorting out of the discrepancy in system  with 
CRIS /CMC or CPM /FOIS . 
IX) Issues  of lack of coordination  w.r.t liaisoning with Network Managers , 
Sr. Divisional  Operations  Managers of his zone and central  organization  
of CRI S and FOIS /HQ NDLS as regards working and maintenance  of 
PCs, Printers, ACs, Hubs, Modems, Routers etc. are concerned.  
X) Issues  of timely action  by divisional  authorities  prior to extension and 
application  of all application  of all system  as per instruction of 
CAO /FOIS . 
XI) Lack  of timely feedback to CFTM  as well as CPM /FOIS . 
XII) Issues  or delays in coordination  with CFTM /Sr. DOMs in annual  
maintenance  contracts  which are required to be entered into well in time  
and matter pertaining to day -to-day maintenance .   
XIII) Any other work  assigned by CFTM /CAO /Superior Officials.  
XIV)  Tenders  and Co ntracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
XV) Establishment  Matter  
XVI)  Tools  and Plants  
XVII)  Imprest  
XVIII)  RTI 
XIX)  Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XX) Review of the execution  of powers of discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.9  ATM  (GOODS) -I (under Dy.COM/Rules  regarding Safety  matters)  
I) Issues  pertaining to revision  of GR  and SR  (issue  of correction slips).  
II) Issues  regarding Monitoring  of overdue cases of Refresher  Course, Vision test 
etc. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
335 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Issues  pertaining to Co -ordination  with Principal , ZRTI  and other traffic  
Training  Institutes . 
IV) Review of the results of Analysis  and compiling of training  related 
information.  
V) Matters pertaining to dealing of cases o f dispensation related to Signal  
and Engineering  department.  
VI) Matters pertaining to Compliance  of CRS  inspection  and other safety  related 
inspections . 
VII) Legal  matters/Court  cases of Operating  department.  
VIII) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
IX) Establishment  Matter  
X) Tools  and Plants  
XI) Imprest  
XII) RTI 
XIII) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XIV)  Review of the execution  of power  for discipline a nd appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.10  ATM  (Goods )-II 
I) Matters of Maintenance  of various Operating  and Commercial  circulars . 
II) Review of Preparation  of Operating  data.  
III) Review of the Preparation  of MCDO  and other monthly  statistical figure.  
IV) Review of Files  regarding Correspondence of letters.  
V) Review of the cases of ODC  movement.  
VI) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
VII) Establishment  Matter  
VIII) Tools  and Plants  
IX) Imprest  
X) RTI 
XI) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XII) Review of the execution  of power  for discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
336 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.2.11  ATM  (Planning ) 
I) Review of the Examinations  of plans  and proposals.  
II) Analysis  of the Review of Works  related matters.  
III) Review of Matters pertaining to Coordination  with different Divisions  
and departments  to expedite  the work . 
IV) Review of Examination  of dispensation matters/ other safety  matters as and 
when entrusted . 
V) Review of draft reply for both Boards’ letters and other Works  related matters.  
VI) Matters pertaining to the Compliance  of inspection  conducted by GM , 
COM and other Board  members.  
VII) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in  Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
VIII) Establishment  Matters  
IX) Tools  and Plants  
X) Imprest  
XI) RTI 
XII) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establi shment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XIII) Review of the execution  of powers for discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.12  ATM  (Coaching ) 
I) Review of issues pertaining to the punctuality  of trains . 
II) Review of issues pertaining to the formation of Special  trains . 
III) Review of train coaching  section  and all related matters.  
IV) Review of Engineering  and other special  Blocks.  
V) Tenders  and Contracts  
(Refer :1) Practice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for Audit 
of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on Role of 
Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Cor ruption ’). 
VI) Establishment  Matters  
VII) Tools  and Plants  
VIII) Imprest  
IX) RTI 
X) Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  in 
SOPEST . 
XI) Review of the execution  of power  for discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
337 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.2.13  Assistant  Transportation  Manager  –Time Table  
Audit  of Time Tabling of Trains includes analysis  of the following -  
I) It is done keeping in mind that i t is a process with judicious mixture 
of user requirement, passenger  sensitivity, local  characteristics, 
operational  constraints and other factors that are part of day to day 
operations . 
II) It should be borne in mind that when a new  train is to be introduced 
issues – whether there is availability of spare terminal  capacity, 
availability of clear cut washing  line slot, spare stabling line berths, 
etc. after changes are made in the present time  schedule  of some 
existing trains  to accommodate this new  train.  
III) Review of the Criteria for deciding on the arrival and departure time .  
IV) Review of Different scenarios worked out, alternatives listed and 
adjustments  made in timings of existing trains .  
V) Review of Actual charting of the train carried out.  
VI) Traction  changing, if an y,  
VII) Difference in Maximum permissible speed  from section  to section .   
VIII) Analysis  of Booked speed  of the train.  
IX) Bare running  time. 
X) It should be seen tha t the Stoppages and their duration are based on  
a) Type of service , Commercial  requirement for –
Entraining/detraining, Reservation  quota, Meal halts, 
Loading /unloading  of parcels .  
b) Operational requirements include: Watering stations , Crew  
changing points, etc.,  
XI) Time taken for acceleration and deceleration.   
XII) Review of provision of Engineering  Recovery  time and Traffic  
Recovery time .  
XIII) Review of issues of fine tuning of crossings and precedence so that 
less important train do not suffer excessive detention . 
XIV)  Operating  time after a crossing depends on the system  of working: 
Token system , Tokenless system , or even Automatic  signal ling 
system . 
XV) Extra  time provided for attaching/detaching of slip  coaches , if any 
based on the quantum of shunting  time taken, done by train engine  or 
not, number of coaches , position of coaches , whether inside SLR  or 
outside the SLR.  
XVI)  For traction changing normally 30’ time  is provided.  
XVII)  Issues  of Stoppages and their duration at various stations .  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
338 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVIII)  A demand for new  stoppage should be processed only if it justifies the 
basic operational  needs and coaching  earnings .     
XIX)  Time tabling  of suburban services which do not follow th e same logic 
as for other long distance trains  would be reviewed to see that 
platform, coaches , path are available.  
XX) Maximum utilisation of EMU  coaches  is ensured by working them to 
an optimum  rake link.    
XXI)  Additional  paths are extracted to some extent by reducing the speed  
differential between successive trains .   
XXII)  Review of long term solution for longer rakes  and the standardization  
of coaching  rakes  in the pursuit.  
XXIII)  Review of preference to integrated  rake links instead of 
standardization  for solving the problems related to staff , catering, 
maintenance  etc.  
XXIV)  Review of passenger  trains  run on an integrated  rake link where one 
single rake  may work  upto 12 pairs of trains , before it gets maintained 
at one of the terminals  with the objective  to come up with rake  links 
where maximum  utilisation can be achieved  
XXV)  Passenger  services being a losing proposition for IR , are generally 
restricted by only 2 constraints: –availability of coaches  and 
availability of locos. Therefore a review of efforts made for si gnificant 
improvement in the running  of these services in order to improve 
overall operations  of IR, provide better quality  of service  to 
passengers , and improve IR’s ove rall image, is evident.  
XXVI)  Review of, certain technically superior services that have been 
introduced in certain selected sections by way of replacement  of 
existing passenger  services such as MEMUs,, DMUs., rail  bus for 
branch line  sections having very low traffic , etc.   
XXVII)  Power  Plan, Loco  links and Crew  requirement.  
XXVIII)  Analysis  of Planning  and expan sion of use of IT  and computerization  
in the coaching  operation . 
XXIX)  Review of execution  of Powers regarding establishment as prescribed  
in SOPEST . 
XXX)  Review of execution  of Powers of discipline and appeal matters as 
mentioned vide DAR  rules  1968 . 
7.2.14   Zero Based Time -tabling  
Audit  may also focus on the new feature of Zero  Based time -tabling  which is to 
be introduced shortly with features  as detailed below – 
Zero  Base Timetabling is switching over from the Mundane exercise of following 
a set printed timetable a very Macro based exercise of scheduling trains based on 
scientific principles, ensuring adequate corridor blocks for maintenance, 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
339 
For internal use of IA&AD  increasing throughput by prov iding freight corridors , improving punctuality, 
improving utilization of Rolling  Stock  and providing convenient and efficient 
services to the passengers and increasing revenue while cutting down losses in 
specific routes.  The benefits of Zero Based Time Tabling are further discussed 
as under  -  
I) Rationalization or consolidation of slots , terminals  
  Reworking of daily slots  for freight trains, normal trains, and maintenance 
blocks across a section. Importance will be given for all three with a 
certain amount of rationalization  in timings allocated for freights and 
passenger -carrying trains. This may help speed up trains. Rationalizing 
the terminating points a lso helps in faster turnaround of a rake. Instead of 
travelling almost empty (or on a section served by numerous other trains) 
for the last leg, if the train is terminated at a shorter location, the rake gets 
more time for attention, watering, maintenance,  etc.  
  Rationalize stoppages and trains taking into account the demand, utility 
for the passengers and commercial  viability. One of the aspects of the 
initiative will be the gradual introduction of the hub  and spoke  concept 
with a view to facilitating easy transfers between “hubs" and “spoke" and 
inter-modal connectivity.  
II) Provision of integrated  ticketing, access for persons with disability, 
leisure facilities, check -in facilities, transfer/ transit facilities, and 
amenities such as travelators, e  scalators, elevators etc., at identified 
stations  designated as “hubs".  The idea is to increase the occupancy of 
poorly patronised trains and to reduce waitlisting in those trains w hich are 
in high demand.  
III) Create more paths for trains by squeezing in of time relaxations provided 
in the time tables  
IV) Speed up train travel in the country i.e. Potential reduction in journey 
times for several trains with a higher maximum permissible speed,  
removal of unnecessary halts and improved average  speeds.  
V) Accommodate the speed upgrades.  
VI) Change of terminal may improve accessibility as it would do away with 
the need to fight one’s way to and through crowded terminals.  
VII) Extensions of tra ins could mean better connectivity with existing services.  
VIII) Dedicated  corridor for freight trains and passenger trains may bring about 
improvements in freight movements which may be institutionalized and 
incorporated in the zero based time  table  
IX) Review of Buffer or allowance timings  
 Presently, trains have two types of time allowances factored in at various 
stages of their trips. One is the Engineering  Allowance (EA), to allow 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
340 
For internal use of IA&AD  slower movement at maintenance locations). The other is Traffic  
Recovery Time (TRT , the time allowed for trains to stop for overtaking 
by a faster train, wait at outer signals for want of platforms, wait at 
previous stations  for want of clear path to the  next block , etc.).  The 
multiple iterations of these allowances are reviewed and rationalized, and 
may save more time.  
X) Slots for Private Trains                               
Another important factor that has probably played a role is the priv ately 
operated trains that IR proposes to introduce. These private  trains also 
need to be run on the same network  and IR has to find slots  for them. 
Starting with a clean slate, formulating a totally new time t able that has 
enough spacing for these trains with the requisite gap before and after will 
need some rescheduling.  
7.3 Audit  of Unit  Level - 
Divisional  Level  
Check  List of items to be  seen during Audit  inspection  of the office of  :- 
7.3.1  Sr. Divisional  Operating  Manager  and its subordinate  offices.  
I) Irregularities in traffic  Transportation , planning  and monitoring  for 
over all freight     operation . 
II) Loss of earning capacity of wagons  due to abnormal detention  at 
terminals /good sheds .  
III) Non-achievement of targets  of loading  and earning by the concerned 
stations . 
IV) Loss of cost  of haulage  due to non -rationalization  of longer carried 
routes . 
V) Loss due to non -functioning of electronic  in motion weighbridge.  
VI) Review of punctuality  of passenger  carrying trains . 
VII) Mis-management  of crew deployment . 
VIII) Training  of Operating  staff/shortfall in imparting training . 
IX) Crew  Mana gement  (Guard) and Roaster of Guard.  
X) Power  plants indicating the daily average  of locos required and 
planned for freight  
XI) Review of shunting  staff. 
XII) Punctuality  loss due to detention  of train outside the station.  
XIII) Avoidable detention  of passenger /Goods  trains  outsider or at the 
station/yard  and action  taken by Operating  Department  to avoid the 
same.  
XIV)  Delay in sending sick wagons /coaches  to shop  for repair.  
XV) System  of providing blocks  for maintenance  as per demand.  
XVI)  Timely completion  of yard  remodelling  etc. wherever required.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
341 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVII)  Non-Optimum  utilization of guard, avoidable payment of breach of 
rest allowance due to inadequate planning . 
XVIII)  Non-revision  of time  table after increased infrastructure  such as 
doubling electrification . 
XIX)  Dela y in exchange of power  at interchanging points or traction 
changing points.  
XX) Abnormal detention  of rolling stock  in route /In yard  (with analysis  of 
FOIS  data.)  
XXI)  Improper operation  of diesel Locos  over electrified routes . 
XXII)  Review of Accident  report registers  maintain in the safety  branch -
non-recovery of dam age and deficiency charges  and accident  relief  
train charges  
XXIII)  Deficiency in passenger  amenities  
XXIV)  Non-closure of uneconomic branch l ine. 
XXV)  Avoidable detention  of train due to non -closure of L -xing in spite of 
commissioning  of ROB /RUB . 
XXVI)  Blockage of Platform due to delay in shunting  of trains . 
XXVII)  Analyze for unloading  points where damages  are taking place  
XXVIII)  Short load running  in BCNS, BOXN  
XXIX)  Under  load running  of BOXN HL or BOBRN or BCNHL rakes , 
leading to extra running  of rakes  per day on IR  system . 
XXX)  Non-provision of basic necessity of longer loops at various station 
distances for long hauls  
XXXI)  Non-achievement of advantages of long haul.  
XXXII)  Review of the progress of Initiatives for capacity augmentation, 
Dedicated  Freight  Corridor, Right  Investments , Improving Port  
Connectivity, Improving Rolling  Stock . 
XXXIII)  Review of the container operations  –  
a) Frequent cases of longer handling time  or blockage of siding by 
the respective operators.  
b) System  of documentation  for stabling, movement, correspondence 
etc. 
c) Compliance  of Prescribed system  of information exchange 
between Railways  and CTOs  
d) Delay in provision of locomotives  attracts penalty , such cases 
should be ideally zero.  Any case arising should be thoroughly 
investigated and action  taken to avoid recurrence.  
e) Clearance of enroute detached BLC unit  wagons . 
XXXIV)  Working of the Freight  Operations  Information  System  (FOIS ) may 
be analyzed to see if the desired Strategic Advantages are Derived 
from the FOIS System  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
342 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXV)  Issues  regarding extension of the c urrent  business practice  from bulk 
movement of freight  traffic  in train load formations to piecemeal 
traffic  by clubbing and moving together similar type of stock  in ‘Hub 
and Spoke’ arrangement to increase its market share by re -diverting 
high profit  yielding piecemeal cargo from road to rail .  
XXXVI)  Irregularities in Global  tracking of consignments  in real time  Rakes 
or individual wagons .  
XXXVII)  Provisions of insight and pipeline of consignments  thus captured on 
the entire BG network  is made available for timely planning  and just 
in time  inventory  management  on a time  span cargo movement which 
may extend to 2 to 5 days from origin to destination .  
XXXVIII)  Position of facilitating acceptance (custo mer’s orders), billing and 
cash accountal of freight  traffic  from identified nodal customer  
centres  which may not necessarily be the handling terminals .  
XXXIX)  Non-Extension of such facilities to customer ’s premises and 
introduction of ecommerce, benefiting both IR  and trade and industry , 
by eliminating manual  transactions which necessarily add to  the 
burden of logistics management .  
XL) Issues  with provision of requisite foundation for a total logistics 
system  furnishing real time  information of the chain  of physical  
distribution , an essential element in reducing inventory  costs.               
a) Review of Rake  Management  Systems   
b) Review of Terminal Management  Systems   
c) General  review of Crew  Management  System .  
d) Review of other benefits of FOIS  and the integrated  Control  charting of 
trains through FOIS -  
e) Review of the RMS  software  having Train  cycle  and Yard  Cycle  in 
connection with the tasks that are used for various online  reporting.  
XLI) Review of the activities of Railway  regarding its initiatives to increase 
the Line  Capacity of a Section  viz. b y increasing CSL / CSR  of all the 
running  lines at all statio ns and yards , reducing the block  section  etc.  
XLII)  Review of the Order of priority for increasing line  capacity works : 
XLIII)  As section  capacity works  involve huge investments and long 
gestation periods, planning  for such works  has to be done with 
meticulous care to avoid traffic  bottlenecks on one hand  and uncalled 
for expenditure  on the other hand .  
XLIV)  Review of the  Organisational and operating measures  to ensure 
optimum  utilization of the existing operating assets  by: 
a) Time table improvements.  
b) Reducing disparity in  inter-sectional running  times.  
c) Review of sectional running  times.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
343 
For internal use of IA&AD  d) Improving efficiency  of staff . 
e) Efficient  operation  of yards , station and t erminals . 
f) Improved maintenance  of equipment . 
g) Monitoring  of trains  by Officers and Inspectors . 
XLV)  Review of Throughput: It may be reviewed to see if wi th increase in 
throughput there is - 
a) Increase in Wagon  Utilisation  
b) Increase in Railways  Revenue . 
c) Easing of Yard  / Sectional  Congestions.  
d) Increase of Reliability.  
e) Customer is sat isfied and repose confidence on Railways . 
f) Cost of Transport  of Freight  Reduces.  
g) Interchange  commitments with adjoining Railways  are fulfilled.  
(For Pt II -III, XII -XIV, XVII – XXXI, XXXIII (a) (d) (e), XXXIX refer Para 3 of Chapter 
F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach to Performance  Audits ). 
7.3.2  Chief  Office  Superintendant under SR . DOM  
I) Casual  leave  and attendance  register . 
II) Review of important cases.  
III) Receipt  and issue  of stores  and uniforms.  
IV) Inventory  of dead  stock . 
V) Wagon  allotment.  
VI) Damages  to stock  due to rough shunting . 
VII) Hire charges  for traffic  vehicles.  
VIII) Register  of advice notes . 
IX) Guard van stores  equipment . 
X) Review of previous inspection  report of Audit  and accounts . 
XI) Review of census  reports  of trains . 
XII) Review of important lines.  
XIII) Review of quarter position.  
XIV)  Pairing of issue  notes  and advice notes . 
XV) Review of pay  sheets . 
XVI)  Review o f pass account . 
XVII)  Review of the payment of daily allowance.  
XVIII)  Review of the sanctioned  strength  and actual strength  of staff . 
XIX)  Duty  list file .  
XX) Policy  file. 
XXI)  Tenders /Contracts   
(Refer :1) P ractice guide for Audit  of Procurement  2) Practice guide for 
Audit of Contract  Management  3) Appendix  – A & B of ‘ Standing  Order on 
Role of Audit in Relation to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ). 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
344 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXII)  File of RTI  cases.  
XXIII)  Cases of Long Absentee .  
XXIV)  D and AR case fi les. 
XXV)  Over  all supervision of Operating  branch/section  in DRM ’s office.  
XXVI)  Early clearance of HQrs. letter reply / DO letters reply.  
XXVII)  Submission of required information to HQrs in time . 
XXVIII)  Chasing of files  avoiding undue  delay.  
XXIX)  Circulation of instruction received from Railway  
Boards/HQrs/Divisional  level to all concerned in time . 
XXX)  Deal with court  cases / Audit  paras / inspections  in time . 
XXXI)  Any other duties as assigned by administration.  
7.3.3  CONTROL Organization  
  Review of Books /documents  and b asic records kept in control  office.  
I) It may be seen that the Station  working rules  of all stations  are updated.  
II) Issues  regarding Working facilities available on the trans -shipmen t shed . 
III) Issues  regarding Schedule  of shunting  engines  in the various yards . 
IV) Check  of Link diagrams of rakes  and engine  working, passenger  services 
and also of goods  trains  where laid  down.  
V) Review of Crew  link diagram of the various services, for the running  staff. 
VI) Issues  of infringement  of maximum  moving dimensions permitted on the 
various sections of the Railway . 
VII) Review of Map showing the Maximum permissible axle  load on all the 
Railways  with which traffic  is interchanged . 
VIII) Review of Charts showing line  capacity of the various sections.  
IX) Review of plans  of the various sections of the jurisdiction  and details of 
train watering, engine  fuelling etc.  
X) Review of Master  charts  depicting all trains  indicated in the working time  
table in force.  
XI) Charts showing jurisdiction  of the various official details of :  
a) The maintenance  branch of the Post  and Telegraph department 
responsible for maintaining control  circuit wires  in good condition.  
b) The various depart ments  of the Railways , 
c) Zone and telephone  numbers of Civil , Police , Military authorities . 
d) List of various hospitals with Telephone  Numbers.  
e) List of stations  Civil , district -wise.  
f) OHE  Sectioning diagram.  
XII) Diagrams - showing the layout of line  wires  of the Control  Circuit . 
XIII) Line patrol chart  
XIV)  A calendar  of returns . 
XV) Cranes  and wagon  weigh bridges . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
345 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVI)  Turn tables and Triangles.  
XVII)  List of spare coaches  based in the divisions  as well as slip  coaches  running  
on and across the division.  
a) Review of Registers maintained by Section  controllers :  
i. Sections controller ’s diary and charge book.  
ii. Inward  message book.  
iii. Outward  message book  
iv. Working Order register  
v. Weather warning and acknowledgement  register  
vi. Sick wagon register . 
vii. Yard  report register . 
viii. Stock  report register  
ix. In-coming and out -going trains  RD (Running  Diary) (other than 
passenger ) 
x. Train  Advice  (T.A. Book)  
xi. Caution  order register . 
xii. Caution  order message book.  
xiii. Morning (6’O clock) position registers . 
xiv. Engine  book.  
xv. Interchange  Register . 
xvi. Load register . 
xvii. Incoming and Outgoing passenger  Train  Running  Diary.  
xviii. Points and S andT Failure  Register . 
xix. Important Yard  balance  Register . 
xx. Control  failure  Register  
xxi. Safety  circular  register  
xxii. Road  map r egister  
b) Chief  Controller  (Movement), (Coaching ) / Dy.  Chief Controller:  
i. Yard  Running  Balance  Register . 
ii. Dy. Chief  Controller ’s Diary and Charge  Book.  
iii. Train  Advise Book.  
iv. Bans and Restrictions register  
v. Forecast  and Acceptance Book.  
vi. Train  Ordering Book.  
vii. Punctuality  Register . 
viii. Without brake -van movement register . 
ix. Accident  Register .  
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
346 
For internal use of IA&AD  x. HQ’s Conference Register . 
xi. Central  control  register  
xii. Emergency  control  register  
xiii. Goods  Train  Performance  Register  
xiv. FATO register  
xv. GM’s Unusual Occurrence Register . 
xvi. CTNL  (Movement) / (Coaching ) / Dy . CTNL’s Order Book.  
xvii. ODC  Register . 
xviii. Rajdhani  Express (and similar trains ) Caution  Order Register . 
xix. Emergency  and General  Control  Office  Message  Register  
(Inward ) 
xx. Emergency  and General  Control  Office  Message  Registe r 
(Outward ) 
xxi. Engine  /Book.  
xxii. Interchange  Register . 
7.3.4  Station  Master /Station Superintendant.  
I) Attendance  register  and casual  leave  account  Pay Bills . 
II) TA Bills . 
III) Salary  bill 
IV) Tools  and Plants . 
V) Fist Aid Box  
VI) Consumable  stores . 
VII) Postage account  
VIII) Stationery account  
IX) Station  Pay orders and supplementary Pay sheets .. 
X) Rent  roll s and quarter register . 
XI) Uniform  Account . 
XII) Passes  and PTOs.  
XIII) Leave  account . 
XIV)  Scrap  ledger . 
XV) Work  orders.  
XVI)  Review of cases.  
XVII)  Check  of atten dance  with tickets  and system  of marking of attendance . 
XVIII)  Execution of tenders  and contracts , if any.  
XIX)  Store Bills . 
XX) Report  on loss of engine  fittings . 
(Refer Appendix  – C of ‘Standing  Order on Role of Audit  in Relation 
to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
XXI)  Register  of Plant  and Machinery . 
XXII)  Use of disposal  of cranes.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
347 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIII)  Hire of diesel engines  from other Railways  and engines  loaned to 
other Railways.  
XXIV)  Review of demurrage  and wharfage  cases.  
XXV)  Review of register  of defic iencies . 
XXVI)  Disposal  of surplus  materials . 
XXVII)  Unnecessary detention  of engines  for repairs  and shortage of materials  
etc. 
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
XXVIII)  Cases of theft  and losses.  
(Refer Appendix  – C of ‘Standing  Order on Role of Audit  in Relation 
to Cases of Fraud  and Corruption ’). 
XXIX)  Damages  to engines  due to careless and rough shunting . 
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
XXX)  Review of last inspection  reports  both by Audit  and Accounts . 
XXXI)  Transfer  of material  from one shed  to another.  
XXXII)  Engagement  of substitute in leave  vacancy.  
XXXIII)  Rent  rolls and quarter register . 
XXXIV)  Arrangements for the bulk supply  of diesel.  
XXXV)  Review of working contracts  
XXXVI)  Review of General  Records  and Registers: TSR  and Private  No. sheet,  
Line block  and clearance register , SWR, Officers’ Inspection  
Register -Indexing, proper filing and compliance ,  TI(M)’s Inspection 
Register, SM’s Night  Inspection Register: (Frequency and time ),  
PME  Register (cross -checked with certificate ),  Refresher  Course 
Register (cross -checked w ith certificate ), Assurance  Register for C 
and D Categories: (cross -checked with Attendance  Register and 
counter signature  by SM),  Staff  counselling  register ,  Emergency  
cross -over register ,  Disaster  Management  Plan Book,  Rule  Books : 
GR BWM AM and Train  intact regist er. 
XXXVII)  Review of Transportation  and Safety  Records  and Registers:  SI -24 
Register :, SI-4 Register, Relay  Room Register:, Stable load Register:, 
Points and Lo ck Indication appearing, Caution  Order Register, Safety 
gradation Register, Safety Circular , Safety Alert  Advice , Joint  Points 
and Crossing Register, OP/T.124 Register, T.369(3b) a nd T -369(I) 
and cross checked with SI -24 Register,  Abnormal working Forms and  
Register: T/A 1425, T/B -1425, T/C 1425, T/A602, T/511, 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
348 
For internal use of IA&AD  Miscellaneous  - Cleanliness, lighting arrangement, water  source, 
lavatory.  
7.3.5  Area Traffic  Manager / Area Officer/ Chief  Yard  Master  of Marshalling  
Yard/ Station  Yard  
I) Review of the functioning of Marshalling  Yards following objectives  of 
a Marshalling yard  need attention to see that all marshalling  operations  
are done on the basis of Quick transit, Economy and Safety .  
II) Review o f the compliance  of General  Principles  of Marshalling  viz.  
a) Passenger  coaches  are marshalled  in middle.  
b) Non-passenger  carrying stock  is scrutinized next to engine  or in the 
rear of the train.  
c) Safety  Marshalling  of SLR  and Anti -telescopic / Steel  bodied Coaches  
on Pass enger  trains  and that of Goods  train is ensured as per specific 
instructions  contained in the G&SR  and Operating  Manual  for -  
i. Marshalling  of Mail  express trains , 
ii. Marshalling  of short service  trains , 
iii. Marshalling  of passenger  and mixed trains , 
iv. Marsh alling  of goods  trains , and  
v. Ghat marshalling : 
III) Review of the performance  of the yards  for its efficiency , reliability, 
economy  and safety  may be done with respe ct to the following activities:  
a) Passing through trains  after changing of engine  and carriage 
examination and detaching sick wagons , if any, and adjusting load of 
the train if necessary.  
b) Breaking up and sort out terminating trains  and loads and the local  
loads originating in the yard . 
c) Forming originating through trains  for the farthest point possible i n 
accordance with long distance Marshalling  orders as laid  down by the 
HQ office.  
d) Forming shunting  and van trains  for the different sections served by 
the yard . 
e) Holdin g back trains  and wagons  until they are able to go out.  
f) Keeping wagon  detention  to the minimum while planning  item No. 
(a) to (e).  
g) Moving train engines  and pilot s between the yard /Loco  Shed and 
sidings . 
h) Placement and removal of inward loaded wagons  for the goods  shed, 
loco shed, private  sidings  etc. served by the Marshalling  yard. 
i) Placement and removal of wagons  from the repacking shed  to the 
yard. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
349 
For internal use of IA&AD  j) Placement and removal of sick/fit wagons  from the sick lines.  
k) Assessment  of room by the nominated shunting  trains  for roadside 
stations . 
l) Arrangements for supply  of stock  as per Indent Register  and ODR 
required by the road side  station in accordance with the orders 
received from the CTNL  (Stock ). 
m) Weighment  of wagons  in certain nominated yards  as and when 
requi red. 
n) Maintenance  of the correct tally of the daily output  of the yard . 
o) Maintenance  of record of detentions to other kinds of stock  such as 
local  loaded, sick wa gons , empties  and special  stock  etc. 
IV) Review of other factors affecting working of the yards : 
a) Lack  of proper advance planning  and co -ordination  between the 
Control  and the yards , and want of proper co -operation  between the 
yard staff, loco  shed staff and carriage and wago n staff, affects yard 
working adversely.  
b) Sometimes, while breaking up the terminating trains , local  wagons  are 
not properly collected in specified lines and they remain scattered in 
the sorting and Marshalling  lines or other parts of the yards  thereby 
causing undue  delay in the yard  operations .  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
c) Late or irregular removal of loads from local  areas affecting timely 
placement of wagons  in their appropriate  sidings  is often a chronic 
cause of trouble in the working of the Yard .  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
d) Empty stock  should not be allowed to lie scattered all over the Yard .  
(Para  on ‘ Evidence gathering methods’ from ‘ Supplementary 
guideline on evidence gathering, analysis  and evaluation  techniques  
in Performance  Audit ’). 
e) Sick wagons  and wagons  for adjustment of loads and transhipment  of 
contents often lie scattered throughout the Yard  thus hampering the 
Yard operations .  
(Para  on ‘ Evidence gathering met hods’ from ‘Supplementary 
guideline on evidence gathering, analysis  and evaluation  techniques  
in Performance  Audit ’). 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
350 
For internal use of IA&AD  f) Shunting  engine  allowed more than the specified time  for loco  
requirements at fixed  intervals . 
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
g) Higher wagons  balance  in a Yard  affects its mobility.  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
h) Efficiency  of the Yard  shunting  engine  or requirement of a better 
shunting engine  or an additional  shunting engine  during the busy 
periods for better working of a Yard.  
i) Review of Issue  of Yard  layout: The shunti ng Jamadar and the Yard 
Master  should carefully watch if any particular feature of the layout, 
such as wrongly placed cross over or a short shunting neck of isolation 
of two busy groups of lines is a restrictive factor in th e efficient 
working of the Yard and if any minor additions and alterations, such 
as providing an additional  crossovers, positioning an existing 
crossover correctly, lengthening of a particular line , etc. are likely to 
improv e the working of a Yard.  
j) Delay in the release of the wagons  by public  and departmental  
consignees cause heavy accumulation of local  wagons  thus affecting 
the working of the Ya rd.  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
k) Non-identification  of any particular traffic , which affects the mobility 
of the yard , is required so as to advice to control  to restrict the inflow.  
l) Review of cases of heavy congestions requiring block  back on the 
neighbouring sections.   
m) Review of the acciden ts in yards  which temporarily reduce their 
working capacity and the steps taken to regulate the inflow of trains  
into the yard  thereafter until the emergency  is over and the yard  has 
regained its normal working capacity.  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).   
n) Late start of trains  from the Yard  resulting  in delay of subsequent 
formations of trains . 
o) Bans and restrictions imposed from time  to time .  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
351 
For internal use of IA&AD  p) Yard  facilities: Ordinarily a Yard should be adequate enough for its 
requirements of sorting, handling of local  traffic , formation of train 
and for holding back stock  until it ca n go out on the sections or to 
various installations in the local  area. If frequent congestion  takes 
place in a Yard or a Yard show poor performance , the entire working 
should be thoroughly examined.   
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits).  
q) Want of proper working facilities, such as adequate lighting, 
communication  between the differe nt key -points in the Yard  and Yard 
Master  and The Assistant  Station  Master requiring a number of 
messengers to run  about in the Yard for this purpose, affecting the 
working of the Ya rds adversely.  
V) Other factors to be reviewed which affect the Yard  working:  
a) Non – rectification of hump gradients.  
b) Hump shunting  not useful enough for the loads which require pushing 
of loads.  
c) Under  load running  of outward trains . 
d) Trains received mis -marshalled.  
e) Congestion/interruption on the section  or in the intermediate or 
terminal  Yards.  
f) Heavy receipts  of local  wagons . 
g) Shortage of engines . 
h) Train  Crew  shortage.  
i) Heavy shortage of Yard  working staff  including C&W staff . 
j) Mixing of loads with CBC and ordinary coupl ings.  
k) Non-transfer of X -loads regularly.  
(Refer Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented 
Approach to Performance  Audits except (f)).  
VI) Review of Operation Considerations Governing  Design  of a Yard   
a)  The lay -out of the Yard  should be such that as far as possible 
movements of wagons  in their several Marshalling  operations  would 
be continuous and progressive  in the direction of the destination  of the 
wagons  because reverse or zig -zag movement reduces efficiency . The 
reception lines, sorting lines, shu nting  necks, Marshalling lines and 
departure lines should, wherever possible, be arranged with this object 
in view.  
b)  The layout should also satisfy the basic principles  of maximum  
flexibility in moveme nts which are required to be performed may be 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
352 
For internal use of IA&AD  carried out. At one and the same time  it should be possible to perform 
all the different movement which is to take place at the same time . 
VII) Review of the independent  movements within one and the same area 
should be done to see if they are planned as far as possible and there is -  
a) Simultaneous reception of train from different directions.  
b) There should be separate Up and Down yards . 
c) Simultaneous dispatch of the trains  to different directions  
d) Tw*o or more shunting  engines  working do not interfere with one 
another, by provision of separate shunting necks.  
e) Reception of one train not interfering with the departur e of another 
train and vice -versa.  
f) Reception of train in one part of the Yard  should not interfere with 
shunting  in another part.  
g) Inadequate facility of light and communication  in the different parts 
of Yard. It should be seen that the Yard are so designed as to permit 
future extensions in each important section  like reception lines, 
sorting lines /marshalling  group etc.  
7.3.6  Review of Marshalling  Yard  Statistics  and other instructions  of Head 
Quarters  regarding  
I) Wagons  dispatched,  
II) Daily  average  number of wagons  dispatched,  
III) No. of trains  received and dispatched,  
IV) Number of wagons  dealt with per shunting  engine  hour.  
Where daily records are kept of the working of shunting  engines  according to hours 
spent i.e.  
I) Inside the Marshalling  Yard  
II) Outside the Marshalling  Yard  and  
III) Average  detention  per wagon  
In Sched uling of Trains, the following Audit  checks  may be done –  
I) The overall schedules and numbers of trains , as reflected in the published 
passenger  timetables and working timetables, are decided in advance 
keeping in view operational  aspects such as loco  availability, loco  
changeovers, crew changes, section  capacity, etc.  
II) A control  chart is drawn up properly by the section  controller  or his staff  
for each day incorporating all the details like sections, stations , level 
crossings  etc. 
III) The cabin control  crew are implementi ng the directives of the section  
controllers by operating the points, signals and interlocking  etc. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
353 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Whether details of five/ four hours block  has been given for each section  
and the   utili zation of this block shall be checked with actual utilization 
along with target of work  and actual work  completed.  
V) List of Permanent  Speed  Restrictions shall be reviewed and action  taken 
to reduce the same may be reviewed. Temporary  speed  restrictions 
effective for long period may be, also, checked thoroughly. Loss on this 
account  shall be calculated on the basis of RDSO ’s Ready Reckoner for 
Calculation of Time Loss on account  of Engineering  and other speed  
restrictions.  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Appro ach 
to Performance  Audits).  
VI) This loss  of time  should be related to cost  of engine  per hour (declared by 
Railway  Board  every year effective from 1st July) and loss  may be 
calculated.  
VII) Whether Level crossings  have been eliminated as per Corporate  Safety  
Plan (2003 -2013) through construction  of RUBs / ROBs.  
7.3.7  Audit  of Derailment  Cases   
 Regarding Audit  of Derailment  Cases, the following points reported 
by the Investigators may need examination - 
I) Reports  regarding con dition of track  with special  reference to gauge  cross 
level, super elevation and other specifications . Review of the rough sketch 
showing the position of derailed vehicles marks on sleeper s and indicated 
point of drop/ mount is indicated.  
II) Locomotive  speed  records/ graph.  
III) Condition of rolling stock  with special  reference to brake power ; 
marshalling  of trains  and engine  details as also breakage of components  
like brake blocks  under -frame assemblies having caused obstructions if 
any. 
IV) The position of block  instrumen ts, signals, points indicators mentioned in 
the report.  
V) Whether the details of panel interlocking  position of switches and 
indicators recorded preferably by two officers or two Sr. Subordinates, at 
stations , of differe nt branches and whether the relay rooms were sealed;  
VI) Seizure and freezing of all records have been done as laid  down in 
accident  manual  
VII) The prima -facie cause of the accident  has been mentioned w ith expected 
time of restoration, Marshalling  of the train, with regard to anti -telescopic 
coaches ; 
VIII) Photographs from different angles to assist in reconstructing the scene of 
the accident  are available on record;  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
354 
For internal use of IA&AD  (Refer Para  on ‘Evidence gathering methods’ from ‘Ssupplementary  
guideline on evidence gathering, analysis  and evaluation  techniques  in 
Performance  Audit ). 
IX) Review of the detail of accident  as reported before the A ccident  Enquiry  
Committee  including the detail of the track  and coach /wagon  if they were 
examined jointly and the details so recorded were jointly signed by the Sr . 
Subordinates available at the site.  
X) Review of the Speed  of the train just before the accident  
XI) Uneven load/shifted load/load in all the vehicles must be checked to get 
an idea of loading  and lashing/securing loads.  
XII) Application  of brakes and Brake  power  of the train and location of 
vehicles without brake power  or whether all hand  brakes were in released 
condition.  
XIII) How was the train recei ved or dispatched by the stationmaster? Whether 
station staff  adopted any abnormal method of working.  
XIV)  Sudden reversal of points S&T  failure  reported before the accident  – how 
and when was it set r ight. 
7.3.8  Audit  of Container  Train  Operation   
During Audit  of Container  Train  Operation, the following issues may be 
looked into :  
I) Each Rail  Terminal  shall have rail  facilities for handling Concessionaire  
Trains along with locomotive  in conformity with siding rules  prescribed  
by Railway  Administratio n from time  to time . 
(Annexure III of ‘ Guideline for Compliance  Audit  of Public  Private  
Partnership  (PPP ) Arrangements .’ 
II) Provision  of RDSO  approved  in-motion weigh -bridge  of prescribed  
stand ards for weighing of Wagons  with and without containers of the 
Concessionaire ’s Train . 
III) Provision  of TMS  and such other facilities as may be required to inte rface  
with and ensure transfer of data online  to FOIS  of Railway  
Administration . 
IV) The Agreement  has been entered into for a period of 20 years starting 
from the Commercial  Operations  Date.  
V) The rights of the Concessionaire  are included in the agreement with 
following provisions: - 
a) The right to undertake the business of collecting, storing and loadi ng 
onto Wagons , consignments  of goods  from any third party;  
b) The right to determine, charge, collect, retains and appropriate  all the 
fees that it charges  from the consigners;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
355 
For internal use of IA&AD  c) The right to obtain access to Rail  Terminals  and develop, own, operate 
and maintain Rail Terminals, including inland container depots ; 
d) The right to procure and own/lease Wagons  and containers.  
e) In the event the Concessionaire  fails to operate its Container  Trains in 
accordance with the requirements of this Agreement  within three (3) 
years from the date of award  of the Approval , Railway  Administration  
shall have the right to terminate the Agreement.  
VI) Recovery  from Concessionaire  from time  to time  when Railway  
administration provided its own Brake  vans,  
VII) In the event, any of the Wagons  of the Concessionaire  are lying idle in 
Railway  area; Railway Administrati on shall levy  a Stabling  Charge  as 
specified by Railway Board  from time  to time , beyond normal permissible 
time. 
VIII) The Concession aire’s Wagons  shall be maintained by the Railway  
Administration  in accordance with the maintenance  schedule  notified by 
the Railway Administra tion. Railway Administration shall normally 
complete the intensive train examination within a period of 6 hours from 
the time  the Concessionaire’s Wagons (in empty  Rake  formation) are 
handed over by the Concessionair e for such examination. Audit  shall 
check that maintenance  was completed within 6 hours and Stabling  
charges  were not paid to Concessionaire for every 24 hours of delay.  
IX) At least four (4) h ours prior to the planned departure of Concessionaire ’s 
Train , the Concessionaire has to submit an indent  (“Indent for 
Locomotive ”) for supply  of locomotive . 
X) If the Concessionaire , any time  prior to arrival of a locomotive  cancels its 
Indent, the Concessionaire is liable to pay  to Railway  Administration  
indent  cancellation  charges  equivalent to one hour Locomotive  Detention  
Charges. In the event, indent  for cancellation  of locom otive  is received by 
Railway Administration after the loco  is dispatched for the Rail  Terminal, 
the Concessionaire in addition to indent  cancellation  charges , shall also 
be liable to pay  to Railway Administration such charges  as may be 
prescribed  by Railway Administration for the infructuous movement of 
locomotive  both ways . 
XI) If after arrival of the locomotive  at the Rail  Terminal from where the train 
is required to depart, or the Rail Terminal where the train is required to 
terminate, as the case may be, the  Concessionaire ’s Train , for whatsoever 
reason not attributable to Railway  Administration , is not attached or 
detached and released (as the case may be), prior to expiry of the Free 
Waiting  Time of two hours (en try to exit), the Concessionaire shall be 
liable to pay  to Railway Administration, Locomotive  Detention  Charges 
for every hour (or part thereof) for which the locomotive  is detained 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
356 
For internal use of IA&AD  beyond  the Free Waiting Time. Provided however, if a locomotive  is 
detained for a period of more than eight hours at any Rail Terminal (either 
the Rail Terminal of origin or of termination, as the case may be), then, 
without prejudice to the C oncessionaire’s liability  to pay  to Railway 
Administration the Locomotive Detention Charges, Railway 
Administration shall have the right, but not the obligation, to withdraw 
and/or remove the locomotive  from  such Rail Terminal. In case Railway 
Administration withdraws and/or remove the locomotive  from the Rail 
Terminal after detention  of 8 hours, the detention  along with movement 
charges  shall be levied without granting any free  time. 
XII) Railway  Administration , in the event of delayed supply  of locomotive  
beyond 12 hours from the indented schedul e time of departure of the 
Concessionaire ’s Train , is liable to give to the Concessionaire a onetime 
rebate equal to two percent of the haulage  charges  payab le by the 
Concessionaire for the Booked Route . During Audit  it should be seen that 
there is frequent concession paid to concessioner due to failure  of 
Railways . 
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach 
to Performance  Audits).  
XIII) In the event a Concessionaire ’s Train  operates with lesser number of 
Wagons /Containers than those prescribed  in the Block  Rakes (“Non -
Block Rake  Trains”), the haulage  charges  for such Non -Block Rake 
Trains shall be recovered on the basis of the minimum composition  of 
Block Rake as specified by Railway  Administration . 
XIV)  The Concessionaire  is liable to pay  to Railway  Administration  Stabling  
Charges , in the following events:   In case the Concessionaire’s Train  
suffers detention  at the serving station for reasons attributable to the 
Concessionaire or when the Concessionaire either declines to acc ept 
Wagons  inside the Rail  Terminal, scheduled to be the terminating Rail 
Terminal or is not in a position to receive placement of subsequent 
Wagons; or   In case of non -acceptance of trains  inside any port  by the 
port authority  concerned; or at any of the stations  en route  due to any 
reason attributable to the Concessionaire.  
XV) Stabling  Charges  shall be levied  only where the detention  of the 
Concessionaire ’s Train  is for a period in excess of 4 hours.  
XVI)  Stabling  Charges shall be payable at the rates notified by Railway  
Adminis tration  from time  to time  and the Railway Administration shall 
have the right to revise the Stabling Charges on an annual  basis; provided 
that any increase in charges  in any fi nancial  year during the term of this 
Agreement , shall not exceed 10% (ten percent) of the charges  payable in 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
357 
For internal use of IA&AD  the preceding year. The current  Stabling Charges are declared time  to time  
by Railway Board . 
8. AUDIT CHECKS IN RESPECT OF IT  APPLICATIONS IN 
OPERATING DEPARTMENT  
For supplementing the above, the detailed check of the IT  utilities installed at 
various locations may be  done as under –   
8.1 Crew  Management  System  
(Refer para 3 of Standing  Order on “Auditing  in an Information  Technology  (IT) 
Environment ’,  Para 17 of Chapter 3 of ‘Regulations  on Audit  and Accounts  
2020 ’) 
During Audit  Modules of Crew  Management  System , the follo wing  checks  
may be exercised:  
I) List of essential data that needs to be entered by all lobbies for making 
CMS  hardware and software  completely functional like Bio -data of the 
crew Drivers, Assistants, Shunters, Guards  and Loco  Inspector  (LI), Crew  
booking  routes , Yard  details, Training  locations, Train  pulling  Locations, 
Rest types, LI monitoring  particulars, Holiday , Crew Gradation, Yard 
details, Training locations, Rest types, LI monitoring  particulars, Holiday, 
Crew Gradation,  Coal Pilots  section , Non  run Allowance , Configure 
Routes ., Reset Crew Password, LR  due frequency , Add QUICK questions  
has been entered.  
(Refer Sl. No. V of Para  No. 5.14 - Chapter V of ‘ Environment  and climate 
change Auditing  guidelines ). 
II) Routes  are created, starts by entering the FROM and the TO station which 
is the Start and the End station of that route  with alternate routes  i.e. via 
options.  
III) Sign on time  is before 30 minutes  of the time  as per Traffic  Advice  (TA) 
and it is not more than 30 minutes and Sign ON activity is carried out at 
the lobbies in the presen ce of the supervisors . 
IV) All working crew have passed the breathalyzer test and in case of positive 
test (i.e. detection  of alcohol in the breath), the action  taken thereon.  
V) Read only option available on the circulars  screen that allow crew 
member to read the circulars  pertaining to Safety , Technical  (Electrical ), 
Technical (Mechanical ) and others.  
VI) While making a circular  the access/ provision is available in system  in 
respect of Login user name and designation, Date and time  of entry, HQ  
from where issued, Circular  Type, Date of issue , Issuing authority , 
Subject, Matter, Date of issue , Subject of the circular , Date of expiry.  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
358 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) The crew have selected one of the circulars  by clicking on any one of them 
to go to the circular  details and the crew click the read circular  option 
button.  
VIII) The supervisor has authorised the sign ON before the crew sign OFF at 
the other lobby,  
IX) While signing OFF at HQ  or outstation, the different rest  particulars are 
provided by the crew and the supervisor has sanctioned  the rest . 
X) While signing OFF, whether crew has reported abnormality of  tracks, 
signals, OHE , loco  etc. and suitable  action  taken on the reported 
abnormality may also be seen.  
XI) Shunters were chosen from the list of available shunters . 
XII) The shunter should have done yard  L.R for the yard he is being booked. 
LR shall bec ome due in 6 months.  
XIII) Since the HOER  requirement is to be checked by the Administrative  
office, the Crew  Management  System  shall not check the rest  particulars 
or the HOER rules . 
XIV)  The shunters due for PME  are not to be booked.  
XV) The crew is also fetched based on the list of locomotives  mentioned in the 
shunter roster.  
XVI)  The shunters are not been due for safety  training  and other technical  
training . 
XVII)  System  generate a list of day details for all the crew who will be available 
for duty  24 Hrs in advance.  
XVIII)  Mobile  number o f all crew members is available with system  for 
automatic  call and name appears in Call Serve screen before 4 hours from 
the Call Serve time . 
XIX)  A unique  ID has been allotted to Loco  Inspector  (LI) 
XX) LI BIO -DATA has been entered,  
XXI)  LI monitors and sees that the read and unread circular  of his nominated 
Loco  Pilot and given instructions  for read the Circular  
XXII)  Booking  of Crew  for coaching  trains  have been approved  and issued to 
all concerned by the administrative office.  
XXIII)  The assistant pilots  are also booked along with t he Mail  Express drivers,  
XXIV)  All lobbies in one location/station are integrated . 
8.2       Integrated  Coaching  Management  System  (ICMS ) 
(Refer Para  3 of Standing  Order  on “Auditing  in an Information  Technology  (IT) 
Environment ).  
8.2.1  PAM  
I) Whether punctuality  calculations at Divisional , Zonal  and Railway  Board  
level are being done?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
359 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Whether PAM  captures reasons of delayed running  of trains ? 
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach 
to Performance  Audits ) 
III) Whether it facilitates to fix responsible reasons of delayed running  at 
Divisional , Zonal  and Railway  Board  level or not.  
(Para  3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on ‘Problem Oriented Approach 
to Performance  Audits ) 
IV) Whether it facilitates for live monitoring  and instant decision making?  
V) Whether it highlights gray areas of decreasing punctuality  or not?  
VI) Whether it provides a tool at Board  level for overall supervision and 
monitoring  or not?  
VII) Whether it is providing summarized and analyzed information for a period 
and financial  year to  understand past and current  position of various areas 
or not?  
VIII) Whether it is capturing various exceptional cases i.e. cancellation , 
rescheduling, diversion, origin change and short of destination  along with 
punctuality  handling due to exceptions or not?  
8.2.2  COIS  
I) Whether Rake  Formation, Examination  is being done?  
II) Whether the time  of Train  Departure  and Arrival  is being captured 
correctly?  
III) Whether Sick  Mark  and Sick Operation is being done properly?  
IV) Whether Shop  Mark  and Shop Operation is being done properly.  
V) Whether Loco  operations  and Light Engine  movement are being captured 
properly?  
VI) Whether VG  is being generated through system  or manually?  
VII) Whether Real time  reporting of coaches  is being done to report correct 
location and status of coaches  or not?  
8.2.3  DATA Module  
I) Whether all train related data are being captured and updated using this 
module  or not?  
II) Schedule  information of train captured in this module  and passed to COA , 
NTES  applications  to minimize data entry efforts and mismatches in this 
data. This module facilitates automatic  population of block  section , block 
section  distance between user entered stations  to reduce user efforts 
(automatic  route  population). Whether automatic  route population is 
being done?  
III) Coach  Master  with all relevant attributes is captured or not?  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
360 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Whether Coach  Update like condemnation, owning Railway  coach  
transfer to oth er Railway, change of coach  number/type are being 
reported?  
V) Whether Station / Yard  lines, capacity are captured as infrastructure  details 
in this module . 
Application  Controls: - 
(Refer Para  4.1 of  Standing Order on “Auditing  in Information  Technolo gy 
Environment” . Evaluation  of application  control  would primarily access the 
efficacy of key input processing and output  controls.  
I) Whether suitable input validations exist to ensure co rrect data entry of 
master data pertaining to ICMS , like details of coaches  , details of 
passenger  locos at station, Zonal  level.  
II) Whether the details of training  refresher course , etc. are being updated?  
III) Whether coach  numbers fed in the system  are genuine and system  accepts 
same coach  number?  
IV) Whether there are differences in the server time  and thin client  time? 
V) Whether MIS reports  are generated correctly?  
Review of IT  Security :- 
I) Physical  Access  Control  
a) Whether ICMS  equipment  were placed in a controlled atmosphere at 
the terminals ? 
b) Whether access of unauthorized person to the CMS  locations was 
restricted?  
c) Whether CCTV  cameras have been installed?  
d) Whether dust free  atmosphere was maintained? Whether protected 
from leakage/seepage of water ? 
e) Whether adequate power  backup, smoke detector, fire  extinguishers 
are in place and in working condition?  
II) Logical  Access  Controls  
(Refer Para 4.1.1 o f  “Standing Order on Auditing  in an Information  
Technology (IT) Environment”  ) 
a) Whether User IDs provided to staff  manning the ICMS  are unique , 
and each ICMS user is login /working by using his own User ID.  
b) Whether functions  of TNC  and Supervisor  are being performed by 
different official.  
c) What are the various levels of users crea ted at the terminal  and need 
based privileges  have been extended to different users.  
d) Whether users created for manning ICMS  is more than required?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
361 
For internal use of IA&AD  e) How is creation/deletion of User IDs for staff  done?  
f) If staff  is outsourced for manning the ICMS , whether separate user ID 
being allotted to Outsourced Staff . 
g) Whether updated circulars  are available in ICMS ? 
h) Check  how many ICMS  users have default password. Whether system  
enforces change of password at first login  and periodical  change of 
password?  
i) Whether users have been sensitized during training  about security  
issues involved in the use of password?  
j) Whether Biometric  system  is installed at a terminal ? Whether it is in 
use? Whether Biometrics  of all users a re recorded in the system  at sign 
on/off locations?  
k) Whether PC  is used in place of Thin Client ? Whether updated anti -
virus software  is available in the system . 
l) Whether adequate A udit trail is available?  
III) Review of Business  Continuity :- 
a) Whether there exists a documented  Business  continuity Plan  with the 
Railway  Administ ration ?   
b) If the formal BCP  is not available how the issues involved are 
addressed at the level of CRIS  or Railway  Board ? 
c) How the BCP  issues are handled at te rminal  level?  
d) Whether there exists any SLA  between Railways  (Board ) and CRIS  
regarding continuity of CMS  application  (uptime/Disaster  Recovery ). 
e) Whether any recovery Point Objective  and Recovery  Time Objective 
has been set by Railways  for ICMS ? Are these adequate for the 
business operations ?  
IV) Review of Contracting Issues , IT  operations , Project  
Management /monitoring :- 
a) How well was the ICMS  Project  conceptualized, in terms of the 
roadmap for implementation ? 
b) Was the project adequately monitored?  
c) Whether operational  constraints in project implementation  considered 
and thoughts of?  
d) Contracting issues (s pecifically those related to supply  of hardware, 
including Thin clients)  
e) Whether Railway  administration has formally signed any MoU  or 
Agreement  with CRIS  for design , development  and implementation  
of ICMS  on Indian  Railways ? 
f) Whether following standard deliverables have been clearly spelt out 
in the MoU /Agreement ? Deliverables: - 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
362 
For internal use of IA&AD  i. Project  Plan 
ii. System  design  document  
iii. System  documentation  
iv. Hardware  requirements with delivery dates and install ation 
responsibilities  
v. Software  development  and delivery  
vi. Training  manual  and training  sessions  
g) Whether there is clear policy  about the operation  of ICMS  at different 
levels?  
h) Whether any procedure has been devised for effecting regular and /or 
emergency  changes in the system . 
i) Who is authorized to make a request for change in the software ? 
Whether requests for changes received from authorized officials only 
are entertained? Whether users are involved in testing  changes and 
level at which user approves changes?  Whether all the changes 
suggested /sought by all zonal  users /other concerned have been 
implemented within the time ? If not, reasons for same?  
j) Whether there are different teams for modifying the software , 
testing /quality  control  and releasing the changed software  in live 
environment?  
(Refer Sl. No. VI (sub -para iv) of Para  No. 4.9 - Chapter IV of Section  
II of ‘ Environment  and climate change Auditing  guidelines .’) 
k) Whether source code  is available in the production  environment o r 
complied /object code is used in the production environment?  
l) Whether updated documentation  of changes effected in the system  is 
maintained and different versions of the software  are maintained?  
m) What i s procedure of communicating changes carried out in the 
system  to end users? What is the system  of imparting training  to users 
of changes in the software ? Whether the procedure is followed?  
n) Whether CRIS  has defined any policy  for maintaining application  
documentation ? If so, whether the same is being followed?  
o) How complete and updated documentation  pertaining to Computer  
operations , User Manual , User Requirement Specification, System  
Design  Document, Programming, Networking etc. is being 
maintained?  
p) What are the terms and co nditions under which Help desk activities 
have been outsourcing ? Whether these are being followed?  
q) What privileges  have been granted to outsource staff ? Whether they 
have any access to live system  /database? Risk  involved in granting 
such privileges ? 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
363 
For internal use of IA&AD  r) Whether the services provided by Helpdesk (as to user complaints  or 
any other manner) are up to users’ satisfaction? How CRIS  
management  is monitoring  the activities /functions  of outsourced 
staff?  
s) Whether, all station/yard  activities from arrival to departure of rake  
are properly captur ed in ICMS  in respect of the following:  
Yard  stock  entry, Dispute Resolve, Yard Position, Sick  Marking, 
Rake  formation, Sickline Placement Sickline Operation, Modify 
consist, Shop  Marking, Movement Shop Placement, Movement (Yard 
to yard ), Remove fit available coaches , Rake Examination , Search  
Feedbacks, Departure  Reporting, Send Feedbacks, En route  
Attachments/Detachments, Generate memo and Arrival  Reporting  
V) Review of reports  generated by the ICMS  system  and Audit  checks  
exercised during Audit are g iven below: - 
S No  Subject  Points to be seen  
1 Departure  Train  
Composition 
Reporting(Source)  Details of trains  cancelled shall be Audited  with 
calculation of loss  of earning.  
2 Summary of Train  
Composition and  
Reporting  [Train  group: 
Mail  express]  Deviation of train composition, if consistent, to 
see whether there was loss  of earnings . 
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on 
‘Problem Oriented Approach to Performance  
Audits.’)  
3 Single  train speed  Schedule  speed  of train and actual speed  of train 
may be compared as well maximum  permissible 
speed  of section  given in the working time  table 
may also be compared.  
4 Train  Consist History  
[Departure ] This statement shows actual load of coaches  with 
schedule  load of coaches  
5 Train  Speed  and Delay 
Summary [BG]  Loss of time  in minutes  due to delay in running . 
(Para 3 of Chapter F of Exposure Draft  on 
‘Problem Oriented Approach to Performance  
Audits.’)  
6 Coach  Utilization  Coach  run per day s 
7 Zonal  Spare Stock  
[Zone:  CR] Zonal  Spare Stock  of Zone  
8 Disputed Coach  
Summary [BG] [ALL] 
[Vehicle  Type: ALL]  Details of disputed coaches  may be au dited  to 
verify utilization/ idling of coaches  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
364 
For internal use of IA&AD  9 Zone wise Train  
Scheduled Speed  
Summary  Schedule  speed  of train and actual speed  of train 
may be comp ared as well maximum  permissible 
speed  of section  given in the working time  table 
may also be compared  
8.3 Audit  Checks  of FOIS   
I) Whether FOIS  facilitates continuous Cargo Visibility.  
II) Whether it facilitates Optimized Asset  Utilization through routing of 
rakes  by the shortest  route . 
III) Whether it has resulted in improved Productivity  by way of elimination 
of manual  processes like maintenance  of registers , preparing of manual  
RRS etc. is eliminated.  
IV) Whether it has facilitated Goods  shed Operations  by providing details of 
movement particulars of rakes , information on demands registered and 
pending  Indents  etc. 
Besides, reports  generated by FOIS  may be reviewed  to examine the 
following:  
a) Year to year performance  of Zonal  Railways  in respect of loading  in 
weight , wagons  usage, loco  usage, wagon  holding.  
b) Year to year comparison  of originating and apportioned  earning of 
Zonal  Railways  in respect of Passengers , other coaching , Goods  and 
Sundry . 
c) Depot - wise container rake  performance  of loading  in the Zonal  
Railways . 
d) Total detention  of the wagons  for loadi ng as well as unloading  for 
each terminal  at differe nt stages from arrival to departure . 
(Refer Para  23 of Chapter 5 of Audit  Quality  Management  Framework 
(AQMS )’ 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
365 
For internal use of IA&AD    List of Abbreviations  
Sr. No  Abbreviation  Full form  
I)  ART  Accident  Relief  Train   
II)  ATM  Assistant  Transportation  Manager  
III)  BCP  Business  Continuity  Plan 
IV)  BEML  Bharat  Earth Movers Limited . 
V)  BG Broad  Gauge  
VI)  BLC  Wagon  used for Container  traffic . 
VII)  BSF Border Security  Force  
VIII)  CAO  Chief  Administrative  Officer  
IX)  CDO  Coach  Depot  Officer  
X)  CELE  Chief  Electric  Loco Engineer  
XI)  CFTM  Chief  Freight  Transportation  Manager  
XII)  CMPE  Chief  Motive  Power  Engin eer 
XIII)  CMS  Coach  Management  System  
XIV)   COA  Control  Office  Application  
XV)  COIS  Coaching  Operations  Information  System  
XVI)   CPTM  Chief  Passenger  Transportation  Manager  
XVII)   CRIS  Centre  for Railway  Information  Systems  
XVIII)   CRS  Commissioner  Railway  Safety   
XIX)   CSL Clear Standing  Length  
XX)  CSR  Clear Standin g Room  
XXI)   CTNL  Chief  Controller  
XXII)   CTO  Container  Train  Operation  
XXIII)   CTPM  Chief  Transportation  Planning  Manager  
XXIV)   CYM  Chief  Yard  Master  
XXV)   D&AR  Discipline and Appeal  Rules  
XXVI)   DOT  Department  of Telecom  
XXVII)   DMU  Diesel  Multiple  Unit 
XXVIII)   DRUCC  Divisional  Rail Users Convention  
Committee  
XXIX)   Dy.COM  Deputy  Chief Operations  Manager  
XXX)   EMU  Electrical  Multiple  Unit 
XXXI)   ESP Engineering  Scale  Plan 
XXXII)   ETA  Estimated T ime of Arrival  
XXXIII)   FOIS  Freight  Operations  Information  System  
XXXIV)   GAD  General  Administrative  Design  
XXXV)   GM General  Manager  
XXXVI)   GR General  Rules  
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
366 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXVII)   Gr. Group  
XXXVIII)   HOER  Hours  of Employment  and Period of Rest  
Rules   
XXXIX)   HOR  Hours  on road  
XL)  ICF Integral Coach  Factory  
XLI)  ICMS  Integrated  Coaching  Management  System  
XLII)   IOH Intermediate  Overhaul  
XLIII)   IRCOT  Indian  Railway  Central  Organization  for 
Telecom  
XLIV)   IRCTC  Indian Railway  Catering  And Tourism  
Corporation  Limited  
XLV)   KRCL  Konkan  Railway  Corporation  Limite d. 
XLVI)   L/E  Light Engine  
XLVII)   LI Loco  Inspector  
XLVIII)   L-xing Level crossing  
XLIX)   M/E Mail  / Express  
L)  M/Van  Motor  Van 
LI)  MIS Management  Informa tion System . 
LII)  MLA  Member  of Legislative  Assembly  
LIII)  MP Member  of Parliament  
LIV)  MR Minister  for Railways  
LV)  NMG  New  Modified  Goods . 
LVI)  NTES  National  Train  Enquiry  System  
LVII)   OCV  Other Coaching  Vehicle   
LVIII)   ODC  Over  Dimensional Consignment  
LIX)  Optg.,  Operating  
LX)  PAM  Punctuality  Module  
LXI)  PC Personal  Computer  
LXII)   PCOM  Principal  Chief  Operations  Manager  
LXIII)   PCV  Propelling  Control  Vehicle  
LXIV)   PM Prime  Minister  
LXV)   PME  Periodical  Medical  Examination  
LXVI)   POH  Periodic Overhaul  
LXVII)   POL  Petroleum  and Oil  
LXVIII)   RB Railway  Board  
LXIX)   RCF  Rail Coach  Factory  
LXX)   RDSO  Research  Development  Standards  
Organization  
LXXI)   RMS  Rake  Management  System  
LXXII)   RMSP  Raw Material  for Steel  Plants  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
367 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
***** *********  
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LXXIII)   ROB /RUB  Over  Bridge /Road  Under  Bridge  
LXXIV)   RR Railway  Receipt  
LXXV)   RSP Rolling  Stock  Programme  
LXXVI)   RTC  Rail Traffic  Control  
LXXVII)   RTI Right  to information  
LXXVIII)   S&T  Signaling  & Telecommunication  
LXXIX)   SIP Signal  Inter Locking Plan  
LXXX)   SLA  Service  Level Agre ement  
LXXXI)   SLR Seating cum Luggage  Rake  
LXXXII)   SM Station  Manager  
LXXXIII)   SR Service  Rules  
LXXXIV)   STM  Senior  Transportation  Manager  
LXXXV)   TMS  Terminal  Management  System  
LXXXVI)   TXR  Train  Examiner  
LXXXVII)   VG Vehicle  Guidance  
LXXXVIII)   VIP Very important perso n 
LXXXIX)   ZRTI  Zonal  Railway  Technical  Institute  
XC)  ZRUCC  Zonal  Rail Users Convention  Committee . 
Chapter 9 – Operating Department  
 
368 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
369 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 10 - AUDIT OF ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF A BOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
Electrical  department, one of the main departments  of the Indian  Railways , 
shoulders lot of responsibility in proper operation  of railway  services.  It looks 
after planning , operation  & maintenance  of all the Electrical assets  including 
Electric  Locomotives , Traction  & distribution , General  Electrical Services . With 
Railway  Electrification  on the rise and Electric traction hauls almost 60% of 
freight  traffic  & 48%  of passenger  traffic , role of the four major  branches of 
Electrical department i.e. General Service , Traction Rolling  Stock  Operation, 
Traction Distribution  and Traction Rolling Stock  has also increased. The 
Electrical General Services Department  is responsible for the procurement  and 
distribution of power  supply  to all Railway Services (except Traction purpose) 
and also for the maintenance  of passenger  coaches  (AC and non -AC coaches ). 
Traction Rolling Stock deals with the production  and maintenance  of Elect ric 
Locomotives, Electrical Multiple  Units  (EMUs) and Main Line  EMUs (MEMUs) 
whereas Traction Rolling Stock Operation deals with the operation  of electric  
locomotives . Traction Distribution includes the maintenance  of traction sub -
stations  (TSS) and Over  Head  Equipment  (OHE ) involved in movement of 
Rolling Stocks . 
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
370 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.  ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT  
-
 
2.1 Railway  Board  
The Electrical  engineering  department at Rai lway  Board  level is headed by the 
Member  (Traction ) earlier known as Member Electrical and is assisted by 
Additional  Member and Executive  Directors  i.e. ED  (RE), EDEE  (G), EDEE 
(RS) , EDEE (M) & EDEE (Dev.). Member Traction is overall in -charge of the 
Electrical department of Indian  Railway and responsible for p lanning  and 
processing of Railway Electrification  projects , procurement , allotment and 
maintenance  of electric  locomotives , procurement  and utilisation of electric  
energy  for both Traction and non -Traction purpose  and procurement and 
maintenance  of electrical assets . 
2.2 Zonal  Railways  
Pr. Chief  Electrical  Engineer  (PCEE ) is the administrative head  of the Electrical 
Department  at Zonal  level with overall responsibility for  efficient working of the 
department. He is responsible to the General  Manager  in all matters pertaining to 
Electric  Traction  and Electrical General Services . On beh alf of the General 
Manager , he directs and supervises all electrical works  related to Railway , 
whether executed by Divisional  Officer or by independent  organisation . He 
oversees the budget  of the Electrical Department and is also responsible for works  
to be executed by the department. PCEE also functions  as Electrical Inspector  to 
the Gove rnment  as defined in Section  36(1) of Indian  Electricity  Act- 1910 , in Railway Ministry
Headed by Cabinet Minister 
assisted by Minister/s of States
Chairman RB
Member Traction
AM (L)
ED(RE) EDEE(RS) EDEE(G) EDEE(M) EDEE(DEV)
Railway Audit Manual  
 
371 
For internal use of IA&AD  respect of all high  voltage electri cal installations and equipment  owned  by the 
Railways . 
PCEE  is assisted by Chief  Electrical  Loco  Engineer (CELE ), Chief Electrical 
Service  Engineer (CESE ), Chief Electrical Distribution  Engineer(CEDE), Chief 
Electrical Engineer -Planning  (CEE /Plg.), Chief Electrical Engineer – Rolling  
Stock  (CEE -RS), Chief Electrical Engineer (Construction ) CEE (C) and Chief 
Electrical Traction  Engineer(CETE).   
(Para 3.2 to 3.8 of the CAG ’s Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  on 
Preparation /updating  of  Audit Universe an d Defining the Apex  Auditable  
Entities /Audit Units  for Annual  Compliance Audit Plans may be linked here ). 
 
 
2.3 Divisional  level  
At Divisional  level, there are Senior  Divisional Electrical  Engineers  for Electrical 
General  services , Traction  distribution  etc.  assisted by Divisional Electrical 
Engineers under the administrative control  of DRM  of the Division . Dy.  Chief  
Electrical Engineers assisted by Workshop  Electrical Engineers looks after 
electrical maint enance  of general services as well as electric  locomotives . 
The Assistant  Electrical  Engineers  (AEEs ) are in -charge of dut ies at sub 
divisional  level duly assisted by SSEs  in-charge of the sections at field level.  
 
2.4 Railway  Electrification  (RE): 
A railway  electrification  system  supplies electric  power  to railway  trains  and 
trams without an on -board prime mover or local  fuel supply . The electrification  
office was established  in Calcutta  as Project  Office  for Railway  Electrification  
(PORE) in 1951, when electrification  of the Howrah –Burdwan section  of the 
Eastern  Railway was began. In 1961, the  Northern  Railway  electrification  office General 
Manager
PCEE
CELE CESE CEDECEE 
(Plg)CEE (RS) CEE (C) CETE
DRM
ADRM
Sr.DEE (TRS) Sr.DEE (TRD) Sr.DEE (TRO) Sr.DEE (G)
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
372 
For internal use of IA&AD  (headed by an engineer -in-chief) was established  in Allahabad  for the 
electrification  of the  Mughalsarai  – New  Delhi  section . Since most of the 
electrification  projects  were in  Central  and South  India , the electrification  
headquarters  was established  in Nagpur  under an Additional  General  Manager  
from 1982 to 1984. The headquarters  was moved to Allahabad under the 
additional  general manager in January 1985 and was renamed Central 
Organization for Railway Electrification (CORE ). 
Member  (Traction ) has the responsibility to oversee and monitor RE  projects . 
The Railway  Electrification  Directorate  in Railway Board  assists him in policy  
decision making. The responsibility to carry out Railway Electrification (RE) wa s 
entrusted  to a specialized agency  of the Indian  Railways , viz. Central  
Organization  for Railway Electrification (CORE ). 
In addition to Central  Organization  for Railway  Electrification  (CORE ), a 
specialized agency  which was set up for railway  electrification , IR had also been 
entrusting RE  projects  to Rail  Vikas  Nigam  Limited  (RVNL ). In a recent 
development , in order t o achieve the target of 24400 RKM by 31 March 2021, IR 
has decided to assign RE projects  to Indian  Railway Construction  Organization 
(IRCON ), Rail India  Technical  and Economic  Services  Limited (RITES ) 
(Railways ’ PSUs ) and Power  Grid Corporation  of India Limited (PGCIL ) (a PSU  
under the Ministry  of Power) having expertise in laying the transmission lines in 
India and abroad.  
The above stated Organization  are responsible for the execution  and completion  
of works  and testing , commissioning  and handing over all installations in proper 
working condition to the Principal  Chief  Electrical  Engineer  (PCEE ) of the Open  
Line. 
(Para 3.2 to 3.8 of the CAG ’s Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  on 
Preparation /updating  of  Audit Universe and Defining the Apex  Auditable  
Entities /Audit Units  for Annual  Compliance Audit Plans may be linked here ). 
2.5 Construction  Organisation  
The Construction  Organisation  is headed by Chief  Administrative  Officer  (CAO ). 
In electrical related work , he is assisted by Chief Electrical  Engineers  (C), under 
technical  control  of PCEE  who is responsible for all Electrical aspects of 
Construction projects  being undertaken by CAO/Construction. At field level 
Deputy  Chief Electrical engineers looks after the execution  of the projects  duly 
assisted by Assistant  Electrical Engineers and SSEs . 
Keeping in view of guidelines  in chapter 3 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines , 
universe of Apex , Auditable  and i mplementing entity of Electrical  Department  
be defined and planned for audit  accordingly   
Railway Audit Manual  
 
373 
For internal use of IA&AD  3. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
List of Activities  of Electrical  Department  
1 Planning , assessment  of requirement and Procurement  of Electricity  from State  
Electricity Boards and other sources for Railways . 
2 Generation  of Electricity   source : - coal, hydro, Diesel , solar etc.  
3 Repair & Maintenance  of wiring in coaches , service  building  and residential  
buildings .  
4 Repair & maintenance  of electric  equipment ’s such as transformers, traction 
motors, EMU  motors, water  pumps, fans,  
5 Repair and maintenance  of electric  locomotives  and EMUs  
6 Repair and maintenance  of Train  lighting and AC equipment ’s of Coaches . 
7 Repair and maintenance  of Over  Head  Equipment  (OHE ). 
8 Supply  of electricity and recovery of due charges  from Staff  and Outsiders  
9 Enforcement of Electricity  Act 2003 and other Acts  prevalent over state 
concerned  
10 Crew  Management   
11 Material  Management  – Receipt, Accountal utilisation and disposal of material  
12 Procurement  of stores  for repairs  and maintenance  activities  
13 Electrical  activities  pertaining to Construction  works . 
14 Electrification  of Rail  Route  including sidings . 
15 Implementation of Energy  conservation measures  as per guidelines  of the Central  
Govt ., Railway  Board  and Zonal  Railway.  
16 Remote Control  of Traction  and Distribution  along with granting of block  etc 
17 New  initiatives including introduction of energy  efficient equipment  
18 Imparting Training  to Electrical  Engineers , Artisan s and Driver s. 
4. IDENTIFICATION OF RISK  PARAMETERS:  
The instruction laid  down in Para  3.10 and 3.11 of the Compliance  Auditing  
Guidelines  may be borne in mind for selecting the activities for annual  audit  plan, 
following approach may be applied: - 
I) The planning  of Central  Government  to fulfil the general need of the 
citizen of India  
II) The vision  and motto  of the auditee  
III) The trend of expenditure  incurred on the schemes  
IV) The general weakness of auditee appeared in various reports  such as Audit  
Reports , vigilance  reports o r otherwise.  
V) The hierarchal preference of schemes /themes in auditee department  
VI) The media  / public  perception about the auditee  
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
374 
For internal use of IA&AD  In view of the above, following are suggested to study by the nominated teams 
for audit . 
I) Budget  speech  
II) Vision 2020  
III) Status of sanctioned  works  at IRPSM  
IV) CAG  reports  for the previous five years  
V) GM Narrative  Reports   
VI) Hierarchal Reporting formats within department  (PCDO ) 
VII) Media and other reports   
VIII) Prevalent mission /schemes such as Mission  41K etc . 
IX) Consultation with auditee to obtain constraints, feedback etc.  
The risk  analysis  of all the activities may be done on the following parameters  
for selection of activity for detail audit  during the year:  
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) Num ber of Tender  cases/ Contract  cases/ other misc. cases.  
III) When last Audited  viz. audited  last one year/three year/five year/more 
than five year/never audited . 
IV) Result  of last Audit . 
V) Audit  perception based on Arrears viz. progress of works  with reference 
to expenditure . 
VI) Audit  perception based on newspaper  publication, Complai nts lodged etc.  
(Para  3.4.5 -Consideration of Audit  Risk and Para 3.4.7 - Risk Assessment  of 
CAG ’s Auditing  Standards  2017 may be considered for linking  here. Further, 
following paragraphs  of the CAG’s Compliance  Audit Guidelines . Para 2.14 
Auditors should perf orm a risk  assessment , Para 2.15 Auditors should consider 
the risk of fraud , Para 2.16 Auditors should develop an audit  strategy and an audit 
plan, Para 3.9 Risk Profiling 4.13 and 4.14 Risk Asses sment and Para 4.15 Risk 
assessment considerations with regard to fraud).  
5. MAIN FOCUS AREAS –AUDIT CHECK:  
(Para  4.8 of CAG ’s Compliance  Audit  Guidelines , 2016)  
5.1 Works  related matters  
The following works  related issues may be audited  as per instructions  laid down 
in the chapter ‘Works  Audit ’: 
I) Works  Programme  
II) Sanctions  
III) Award of Tenders  and execution  of Contracts  
IV) Advances  to contractors  
V) On account  bill, final bills  and completed contracts  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
375 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Measurement  books  (MBs)  
VII) Material  modifications  
VIII) Contractor’s ledgers  
IX) Completion  Reports /Estimates /Statements  
X) Works  register  and Revenue  Allocation  Register  (RAR)  
XI) Arbitration  Award  
5.2 Other Audit  Checks  
5.2.1 Management  of Locomotives  
Utilization of Locomotives  
Procurement  of locomotives  is done at Railway  Board ’s level and apportioned  to 
Zones based on the traffic  requirement. However, Zonal  Railways  have further 
responsibility to plan for material , manpower , infrastructure  etc. for induction of 
additional  locomotives . After allocation  of locomotives  by Railway Board  and 
their receipt  in Zones, the operation  and maintenance  of locomotives  rest fully 
with the Zonal Railway Administration . 
Engines  being a critical and costly asset , its utilization have to be carefully 
monitored. For improving the Engine  utilization, watch is to be kept on terminal  
detention , speed  of goods  trains , under load running , ineffective Locos  and proper 
utilization of spare Locos.  
During check o f engine  utilization, Audit  should see whether:  
I) Locomotives  are in good working order and staffs are well versed in Loco  
operations  and trouble shooting.  
II) Hauling  capacity of the Locomotives  is properly utilised.  
III) Engineering  speed  restrictions are regularly reviewed  
IV) Line capacity of the Sections are properly utilised without causing 
congestion  and steps for augmenting line  capacity should be taken in time . 
V) The movement of the Engines  to & from Sheds  are  monitored  
VI) Lie over period of Passenger  Link Power  may be utilised in short distance 
shuttling etc.  
VII) Effective control  over traffic  yards  to reduce other engine  hours, detention  
to locos at important loading /unloading  points and industrial sidings .  
VIII) The factors adversely affecting the Locomotive  utilisation of speed  of 
goods  train, terminal  detention  etc. are got analysed by suitable multi 
departmental  teams and remedial  measures  taken.  
IX) Prompt attention and action  to equipment  failure  and Loco  troubles has 
been taken by the Railway  administration.  
(Para 5.6 to 5.10 of Performance  Audit  Guidelines  2014  on Data  collection and 
Analysis  and Chapter 5 of C AG’s Compliance  Audit Guidelines 2016  on 
Conducting Compliance Audit).  
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
376 
For internal use of IA&AD  Maintenance  of Locomotives  
Locomotives  are amongst the most significant assets  of the Railways  and provide 
motive power  for train services both passenger  and freight . Timely availability 
and reliability of performance  of locomotives  are critical to the operation  of train 
services. This in turn requires timely, regular and adequate maintenance  for 
ensuring their good running  condition. Zonal  Railways have the respo nsibility to 
plan for material , manpower  and infrastructure  for the maintenance  of 
locomotives . Each locomotive  is assigned to a designated loco shed which is 
responsible for its maintenance  and monitoring  its performance . 
Audit  is to see whether:  
I) Adequate capacity and infrastructure  exist for maintenance  of 
locomotives ; 
II) Repair and maintenance  activity is carried out with optimum  efficiency  
and within specified time  schedule  to ensure earliest availability of 
locomotives  for traffic  use and there is no detention  of locos;  
III) Efficient  system  exist for material  management  to ensure availability of 
spares  required for maintenance  of locomotive  and locos are not detained 
in the Shed/Workshops  for want of spares; and  
IV) The quality  and periodicity  of repairs  were sufficient for ensuring safety  
and optimum  level of services;  
V) Ineffective percentage  of locos does not exceed th e target fixed  by the 
Railway  Board ; 
VI) Efficient  system  exists  to monitor receipt /despatch of Locos  from/to yards  
into the Worksh op for POH /repairs ; 
VII) There exists a neutral  inspection  wing in each workshop for the inspection 
of the loco  after completion  of its POH  with a view to ensure the quality  
of its fitness for Railway  operations .  The incidents of rejection  of 
locomotives  during their inspection and reasons thereof may be collected 
by audit  and comment on the workmanship of the workshop;  
Audit  Check list on Warranty of material/equipment in Maintenance  of 
Locomotives (Equipment/Material ) 
I) Whether warranty  clause exits in condition of contracts for purchase of 
equipment and maintenance contract?  
II) Whether the warranty  of equipment and its accessories  is guaranteed for 
satisfactory performance  for a sufficient period, it should normally be of 
30 months from the date of delivery or 24 months from date of 
commissioning of the locomotives, whichever is earlier.  
III) Whether during the warranty  period, all scheduled maintenance, 
preventive maintenance as well as breakdown maintenance is being 
attended by the original equipment manufacturers company (OEM )? 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
377 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Whether Material  as well as manpower cost of maintenance is being borne 
by the OEM  during  warranty  coverage?  
V) Whether before entering into any Annual Maintenance  contract of 
equipment in working condition and which are to be covered in the AMC  
are being jointly certified by the Contractor & user Railways ?  
VI) Whether AMC  contract made effective immediately from next day when 
the warranty  period expires?  
VII) Whether AMC  is released to the OEM  within warranty  period as p er 
conditions of original contract for avoiding gap of equipment uncovered 
into AMC?  
VIII) Whether AMC /warranty  agreement entered for equipment manufacture 
by Railways ? 
IX) Whether during warranty  covera ge services, the replaced consumables, 
tools, items which is contractor’s property is removed from the Railway ’s 
premises with due authority?  
X) Whether OEM /contractor is paid for his replacement/maintenance 
activities which was to  be done at its own cost and expense?  
XI) Whether during the maintenance period OEM /contractor arranged for 
transport of man and material at its own cost as and when required for 
maintenance of the equipment?  
XII) Whether the maintenance and support  by the contractor extended for 
periodical  preventive checks as per the maintenance schedule of 
locomotives for trouble free operation of the equipment?  
5.2.2 Energy  Management  
In terms of Para  10111 of Indian  Railways  Manual  for AC Traction  Maintenance  
and Operation  (Volume  I), energy  consumption  and maximum  demand for goods  
and passenger  services should be estimated based on an assessment  of traffic  
expected during the next financial  year obtained from the Operating  Department .  
It should be analysed  whether the Contract  Demand  requirements for connectio ns 
obtained from suppliers  of electricity are being assessed based on the actual 
demand requirements of previous Periods.  Assessment  of change in requirements 
due to likely changes in track  density, techno logical changes etc. may also be 
checked for possible comments .  
Audit  should see whether – 
I) Assessment  for energy  consumption  is carried out periodically.  
II) Revision  of norms  considering the average  actual requirements in the 
previous year.  
III) Assessment  of energy  requirements for traction as well as non -traction 
purpose . 
IV) Provision  of Energy  Meters and fuel efficiency  kit in locomotives  have 
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
378 
For internal use of IA&AD  been made . 
V) Switching  off stand by transformer provided on traction sub -station (TSS) 
is being done.  
VI) Electric  charges  are being paid to the authorities  as per prescribed  tariff 
and there is no overpayment . 
VII) Power  factor at the service  connections is maintained to avoid payment o f 
low power  factor surcharge  and incentive  for maintaining required power  
factor is being availed by Railway . 
(Para  4.25 and 4.26 of CAG ’s Environment  and Climate Change – Auditing  
Guidelines , 2010 on Environmental  Audit  Methodology and Process  may be 
mentioned here. Further the detailed area of examination on Environment related 
initiatives and activities mentioned in Chapter -V of the above guidelines ). 
5.2.3 Maintenance  of Residen tial and Office  Buildings : 
 During Audit  of records relating to maintenance  of residential  and office 
buildings , it should be seen as to whether:  
I) System  for account al of consumables  stores  provided to the maintenance  
of office buildings  & residential  buildings  and for other usages are in 
place.  
II) Stock  verification  is carried out as per the prescribed  schedule  and if any 
discrepancies are noted during stock  verification  that has been sorted out.  
III) Electric  charges  are recovered at the rates prescribed  by Railway  Admn  
from time  to time . 
IV) Electric  charges  for recovery from the staff  are prescribed  in accordance 
with the charges  paid to the authorities  as per tariff.  
V) The Electricity  charges  are centrally fed by the Electrical  Department .   
The correctness of these charges  to be verified by Audit  during their local  
inspections . Meter reading statement and Electricity Bills  (Electrical 
Department) should be examined.  
VI) System  of recovery of Electricity  charges  of the Railway  buildings  let out 
to out siders and other Government  departments  is in place and recovered 
from the occupants are collected from time  to time  as per Railway Board ’s 
directives.  
VII) Whether recoveries  of electricity charges  are being e ffected from the 
Railway  unions.  
(Para 5.6 to 5.10 of Performance  Audit  Guidelines  2014  on Data  collection and 
Analysis  and Chapter 5 of CAG ’s Compliance  Audit Guidelines 2016  on 
Conducting Compliance Audit).  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
379 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.2.4 Passenger  Amenities  Works  Such as Lift & Escalator Trilingual Passenger 
Amenity Board  Mobile  Charging Points etc.  
Passenger  amenities  works  means providing minimum, ess ential recommended 
and desirable amenities  to the passengers  in view of the changing requirement 
and technological improvement.  
During the Audit , it should be seen as to whether:  
I) Passenger  amenities  works  such as Glow Sign Boards for easy 
identification  of various amenities  at stations , Lift  & escalator , Mobile  
Charging Points, Air  conditioned Waiting  halls  & Dormitories  etc. has 
been provided at important stations.  
II) Lift and escalator : There is provision of Annual  Maintenance  contract  
(AM C) for Lift and escalator .  
III) Tri-lingual passenger  amenity board : A tri -lingual  passenger  amen ities 
board for the easy identification  of facilities for the travelling  passengers  
has been provided at important stations . 
IV) Replacement of CFL lamps with LED  lamps : As a measure of energy  
conservation use of LED lights were introduced in VIP  lounge and 
concourse areas which gives more illumination level apart from 
conservation of energy  
V) Mobile  Charging Points : The waiting halls  and concourse areas of 
stations  have been provided with mobile charging points.  
VI) It should also be seen as to whether all the expenditure  incurred on 
providing amenities  for passengers  and other railway  users are within the 
sanctioned  provisions and booked to the relevant head  of account . 
5.3 Compilation  of Accounts  and Funds  Certification : 
Compilation  of accounts  and funds certification  may be conducted in accordance 
with detailed  guidelines given in Chapter VII of Indian  Railway  Financial  Code  
Vol. I . 
5.4 Utilisation of Un -anticipated Credits:  
Please see para number 7.30  of Chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department).  
5.5 New  Services  Not Contemplated In The Budget  
Please see para number 7.31  of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department).  
5.6 Expenditure  Late In The Financial  Year  
Please see para number 7.32 of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department)  
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
380 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.7 Human  Capital  Formation and Utilisation of Zonal  Training  Institutes  
I) Zonal  Electrical  Training  Institute  (ZETI) are set up in railways for 
imparting various types of training  courses to the loc o running  staff and 
loco maintenance  staff. The training  institute offers induction courses for 
newly recruited Assistant  Loco  Pilots  from RRBs, newly promoted Loco 
Inspectors , refresher courses for Loco Pilots, EMU  Pilots, Promotional 
Courses to the LP (Shunter), LP (Goods ), LP(Passenger ) and C onversion  
Courses to Diesel  ALP/LP to Electrical ALP/LP. It also imparts initial 
courses, refresher course and promotional courses to maintenance  
supervisors  and technicians.  
II) Audit  needs to see whether the objectives  of setting up ZETI are achieved 
and the training  are held as per the laid  down schedule . 
(Para 5.6 to 5.10 of Performance  Audit  Guidelines  2014  on Data  collection and 
Analysis and Chapter 5 of CAG ’s Compliance  Audit Guidelines 2016  on 
Conducting Compliance Audit).  
5.8 Tests to Judge Productivity  of Capital  Expenditure  (Post  Project  Appraisal ) 
Please see para number 7.34  of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department). . 
5.9 Manpower  Management  
Please see  para number 7.37  of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department).  
5.10 Audit  Of World Bank /ADB  Aided  Projects  
Please see para number 7. 38 of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department).  
5.11 Public  Private  Partnership  Projects : 
Please see para number 7.39  of Chapter -6 (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department).  
5.12 Information  Technology  Systems  
Audit  of the followin g IT systems which are common to all departments  and are 
also being used by Electrical  department has been discussed separately. 
Following points may be conducted in accordance with chapters  included in 
Railway  Audit Manual  – 
I) Indian  Railways  Projects  Sanctions  & Management  (IRPSM ) 
II) Indian  Railway Pay Rolls & Accounting System  (IPAS ) 
III) Indian  Railway  E-Procurement  System  (IREPS ) 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
381 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.12.1  Crew  Management  System  (CMS ) 
CMS  is a Web -based Application . CRIS  has developed a 24x7 Crew  
Management  System  (CMS) application  managing its crew for operating trains  
on the largest rail  network . CMS project deals with all categories of train crew 
who are required to operate all type of train on Indian  Railways . It was introduced 
over Indian Railways  (IR) to manage crew assignments to various trains  and to 
improve efficiency  in crew operations , their monitoring  and compliance  with 
safety  requirements and to improve financial  management . CMS project was 
sanctioned  by IR during 2005 -06. 
During its Audit , it should be seen that:  
I) There is no huge gap  in number of sign on and sign off  records  
II) Active crew not booked during three months  
III) HOER  rules  are followed scrupulously  
IV) There is no discrepancy  in distances between Rate  Branch  system  and 
CMS  
V) There is no huge gap  between TA  creation time  & call serve time  
VI) Grading  of crew by loco  Inspector  is done as per the extant  rule. 
VII) There is no long gap  between Crew  sign off  and supervisory approval  
VIII) Whether proper monitoring  is done on Periodical  Medical  Examination ? 
IX) Non utilisation of crew for long time  
X) Periodical  rest of crews  is given  
XI) Whether Ki lometrage Allowance/Allowance generated by CMS  is 
accurate?  Whether Kilometrage Allowance/Allowance in Lieu of 
Kilometerage are also prepared manually by Crew Staff ?  If yes, reasons 
for the same may be  ascertained and whether t he same match with CMS? 
If not, reasons for the same and action taken by the Railway  
Administration to address the discrepancies, if any.  
(Para 5.6 to 5.10 of Performance  Audit  Guidelines  2014  on Data  collection and 
Analysi s and Chapter 5 of CAG ’s Compliance  Audit Guidelines 2016  on 
Conducting Compliance Audit).  
5.12.2  Software  for Locomotive  Asset  Management  (SLAM ): 
 The System  for Locomotive  Asset  Management  (SLAM ) project is for 
management  of Electric  Locomotive for Loco  Maintenance , Operation, 
Schedules  Planning , Execution and Monitoring . This software  system  envisages 
development  of software  for interlinking sheds  (including out pits), 
divisional /Zonal  headquarter , workshops , CLW , RDSO  and Railway  Board  
(Ministry  of Railways ). Besides management  at loco  sheds it aims to provide a 
portal based Custom  built application  module  for providing specified 
functionalities. The System for Locomotive Asset Management (SLAM) 
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
382 
For internal use of IA&AD  software as a pilot  project has been develo ped using web  technology  and is 
deploye d on web  based central  server at advance stage.  
This software  is, however, not fully implemented in all Zonal  Railways . 
5.13 Check list for PCEE  office such as check of: - 
I) Dissemination of Railway  Board  policy/instruction/order among 
Divisions and subordinate  offices  
II) Co-ordination with Central  Govt.’s other Ministries  
III) Co-ordination with state Governments  
IV)  Implementation of orders of court of laws  relating to electrical 
department  
V) Administrative approval of lump sum works and out of turn works  
VI) Technical sanction to detailed e stimates  
VII) Sanction to excess over estimates  
VIII) Material  modification  
IX) Dealing of Tender and Contracts  
X) addition of item in schedules of contracts  
XI) termination of contracts  
XII) special repairs of  Rolling  stocks  
XIII) variation in quantitie s of schedule of contracts  
XIV)  contract management  eg PG, EMD, SD, extension, LD etc  
XV) Re-appropriation  
XVI)  Special repair to Rolling  stock  
XVII)  Work under urgency certificate  
XVIII)  Transfer of machinery  
XIX)   Policy regardin g energy conservation  
XX) Policy regarding crew management  
XXI)  Policy regarding procurement  of energy from electricity board  
XXII)  Action as electrical inspector  
XXIII)  Policy regarding outsourcing  
XXIV)  Dealing of arbitration cases  
XXV)  AMC  of electrical equipment  
XXVI)  Hire of Plant and Machinery  
XXVII)  Action relating to dealing with accidents  cases disaster management  
XXVIII)  Policy regarding safety  
XXIX)  Policy regarding punctuality  
XXX)  Policy regarding economy  
XXXI)  Recruitment of Crew  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
383 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.14  Check list for Sr. DEE office such as check of: - 
I) Dissemination of Railway  Board  policy/instruction/order received 
from headquarters office or other wise among  subordinate  staff an d 
implementing offices  
II) Co-ordination with headquarters office PCEE  and other departments  
of Railway  
III) Co-ordination with other Central  Govt.’s departments  locally 
regarding co nsumption of electricity and saving of energy  
IV) Co-ordination with state Governments  
V)  Implementation of orders of court of laws  relating to electrical 
department  
VI) Administrative approval of lump sum works and out of turn works  
VII) Technical sanction to detailed estimates  
VIII) Sanction to excess over estimates  
IX) Material  modification  
X) Dealing of Tender and Contracts  
XI) addition of item in schedules of contracts  
XII) termination of contracts  
XIII) special repairs of  Rolling  stocks  
XIV)  variation  in quantities of schedule of contracts  
XV) contract management  eg PG, EMD, SD, extension, LD etc  
XVI)  Re-appropriation  
XVII)  Special repair to Rolling  stock  
XVIII)  Work under urgency certificate  
XIX)  Transfer of machinery  
XX)  Action taken for  energy conservation  
XXI)  Dealing of  crew management  
XXII)  Entering into contract with state or other electricity company and 
Procurement of energy from electricity board  
XXIII)  Action as electrical inspector  
XXIV)  Outsourcing  
XXV)  Dealing of arbitra tion cases  
XXVI)  AMC  of electrical equipment  
XXVII)  Hire of Plant and Machinery  
XXVIII)  Action relating to dealing with accidents  cases disaster management  
XXIX)  Action for  safety  
XXX)  Action for increase of punctuality  
XXXI)  Observation of eco nomy  in expenditure  
XXXII)  Calculation of actual crew requirement and action for Recruitment of 
Crew  
 Chapter 10  – Audit of Electrical Department  
 
384 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.15 Check list for ADEE office such as check of: - 
I) Implementation of Railway  Board  policy/instruction /order received 
from Divisional headquarters office or otherwise among  subordinate  
staff  
II) Co-ordination with headquarters office PCEE ,  Sr. DEE and other 
departments  of Railway  
III) Implementa tion of orders of court of laws  relating to electrical 
department  
IV) Implementation of  Contracts and execution of works  
V) variation in quantities of schedule of contracts  
VI) contract management  eg PG, EMD, SD, extension, LD etc  
a. Repair to Rolling  stock  
VII) Work under urgency certificate  
VIII) Transfer of machinery  
IX)  Action taken for  energy conservation  
X) Dealing of  crew management  
XI) Entering into contract with state or other electricity company and 
fProcurement of energy from electricity board  
XII) Action as electrical inspector  
XIII) Outsourcing  
XIV)  Dealing of arbitration cases  
XV) AMC  of electrical equipment  
XVI)  Hire of Plant and Machinery  
XVII)  Action relating to dealing with accidents  cases disaster manageme nt 
XVIII)  Action for  safety  
XIX)  Action for increase of punctuality  
XX) Observation of economy  in expenditure  
XXI)  Calculation of actual crew requirement and action for Recruitment of 
Crew  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
385 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
386 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHA PTER 11  – SIGNAL & TELECOMMUNICATION  
DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT SIGNAL & TELECOMMUNICATION 
DEPARTMENT  
The s ignalling  and t elecommunications  on Indian  Railways  (IR) has evolved 
steadily from rudimentary to m odern  system  to meet operational and s afety  
needs of ever increasing growth of passenger  and freight  traffic  over th e years. 
With the  inescapable role of r ailway  signalling and t elecommunications in train 
operations  and availability of modern technologies , signalling and 
telecommunication  arrangements are poised for quantum jump in the years to 
come.  
Electronic  interlocking , route  relay interlocking, p anel interlocking, LED signals 
and colour light signals  and a utomatic  block signalling  have been introduced on 
many routes . safety  aids like t rack circuiting Block Proving through Axle 
Counters  and interlocking  of level crossing gates and provision of telephones at 
manned level crossings  had been i ncreasingly adopted to further enhance safety  
in train operation . Capacity utilisation of the track is increased in some sections 
of IR by providing  Intermediate Block Signalling.  
The major  S&T  construction  activities of the Railways  are under the 
administrative control  of a Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer  
(Construction ) reporting directly to the General  Manager  of an Open  Line or 
under the independent  administrative control  of a Chief Administrative  Officer  
(Construction) or General Manager  (Construction) reporting directly to the 
Railway  Board .  
Thus, S&T  Department  consists of both administrative and project offices wi th 
signalling  workshops  and Indian  Railway  Project  Management  Unit (IRPMU ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
387 
For internal use of IA&AD  2. ORGANISATIONAL  HIERARCHY  IN INDIAN RAILWAY S 
2.1 Organisational Structure at Railway  Board  Level  
 
2.2 Zonal  Level Organisation  
 Chairman  and CEO, 
Railway Board
DG/S&T
AM(Signal)
PED(Sign
al)ED/Sig.(De
v.)ED/Sig.(Pro
ject )AM(Tele.)
ED/TD Dir./Tel.ED(S&T)/C
o-ord.AM/Planning
PED/Mobili
ty
ED/Mob.(CE) ED/Mob./S&T
GM
CSTE
CSE
Principal/STTS DyCSTE/S
SSTE/ASTE
SSE/S/HQCCE
DyCSTE/T
SSTE/ASTE
SSE/T/HQCSTE/PLG
DyCSTE/PLG
SSTE/ASTECSTE/PROJ
DyCSTE/PROJ
SSTE/ASTECWM
WM
PECAO/CN
CSTE/CN
DyCSTE/CN
DSTE/ASTE
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
388 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.3 Divisional  Level Organisation  
 
 
2.4 Construction  Organisation : 
The Construction  Organisation  is headed by Chief  Administrative  Officer , S&T  
(CAO ), PCSTE  assisted by CSTE , CCE  and DCSTEs at Zonal  Headquarters  
level. At field level Dy.  CSTE look after the execution  of the projects  duly 
assisted by the SSTEs and SSEs . 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES  OF THE DEPARTMENT  
✓ At Ministry  level  
✓ Zonal  Railway / Production  Units / other Organi sation  level.  
✓ Field level.  
3.1 At Railway  Board  Level  
I) Framing / interpretation of rules   
II) Framing of policy  and planning  in regard to different signalling  and 
telecom  equipment . 
III) Approval  of Projects  
IV) Sanctioning of estimates   
V) Funds  provisions  
VI) Monitoring  of progress of projec ts DRM
ADRM
Sr.DSTE/DSTE
ASTE
TEL. SUPDT. SSE/S
SE/S
JE/SSSE/T
SE/T
JE/TCh.OS SSE(Drawing)
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
389 
For internal use of IA&AD  3.2 At Zonal  Level  
I) To ensure efficient maintenance  and renewal  of all works  and  other 
structures   
II) Preparation  and compilation  of budgetary  requirements  
III) Coordination  and compilation  of Annual  Works  programme  and getting 
approval  for the same.  
IV) Control  over expenditure  of sanctioned  projects  – to incur expenditure  
within the limits of financial  powers  
V) Compilation  and maintena nce of Division  wise schedule  of rates  
VI) Compilation  and maintenance  of standard design  and drawing  
specification  
VII) Floating of tenders  and finalisation – monitoring  execution  of work  
3.3 At Division / Field level  
I) Maintenance  of all signalling  and telecommunication  equipment  in a 
satisfactory and safe  condition  
II) Preparation  of plans  and estimates  
III) To ensure economic  use of materials  
IV) Maintenance / accountal of surplus  and released material  stock  
V) Ensuring supply  of approved  quality  materials  and tools  for the 
installation and maintenance  of the equipment . 
VI) To ensure commencement of any work  with proper sanction of 
competent  authority  
VII) To ensure strict adherence o f sanctioned  design  and drawing  in execution  
of works  
VIII) Ensuring that all important inspection  notes  of higher authorities  receive 
prompt action . 
IX) Ensuring strict discipline amongst his staff  within the frame work  of the 
Rules . 
X) Reviewing the position in regard to supply  of stores  on the Divisi on.  
3.3.1 Signalling  
I) Technical  Duties  
a) Efficient  and proper maintenance  of all signaling  and interlocking  
equipment  in accordance with the provisions of the Manual , Rules  and 
Regulations  in force and instructions  issued from time -to-time ; 
b) Execution  of work s incidental to the maintenance  of equipment , 
additions and alterations to existing installations and new  works  in 
accordance with approved  plans  and circuit diagrams under Open  
Line working conditions ;  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
390 
For internal use of IA&AD  c) Overhauling  and carrying out alterations to the existing locking of 
interlocking  frames in accordance with approved  interlocking  tables 
and interlocking  charts , as also carrying out alterations to electrical 
signaling  and interlocking  systems in accordance with approved 
interl ocking  and selection tables and circuit diagrams when authorised 
to do so .  
d) Carrying o ut works  in an emergency  on his  own initiative and 
responsibility. In such cases, intimation must be given by a messa ge 
on control  phone.  
II) Equipment  Inspection  : 
a) The SSE ( Signal ) in-charge of a section  carries out inspection  and 
testing  of all the equipme nt at intervals  not exceeding one month  in 
accordance with the detailed instructions  contained in this Manual . 
Telecommunication  equipment  entru sted to his maintenance  is 
inspected in accordance with instructions  contained in the 
Telecommunication Manual. While carrying out his inspections , the 
SSE (Signal)  shall take t he maintainer of the section  with him 
whenever possible.  
b) Special  attention shall be paid during inspections  to the work  of each 
maintainer in respect of adjustments , clean ing and lubricating of 
moving parts of all points and signal  equipment  to ensure that they 
work  smoothly. Any fault detected shall be arranged to be rectified at 
the earliest.  
c) The inspection  shall be thorough with reference to the prescribed  
schedule  of maintenance  and purposeful to ensure that equipment  
function  satisfactorily  safely and with minimum liability  to failures.  
d) The Interlocking  Plan, Cabin Diagrams , Working Rules  etc. shall be 
inspected to see that they are up -to-date. Any discrepancy noticed 
shall be brought to the notice of t he SSE ( Signal ). 
e) A record shall be made in the Signal  Failure  and Inspection  Book at 
each station of the monthly /quarterly inspection . 
III) Foot -plate  Inspection : 
a) The SSE (Signal)  shall carry out foot -plate  inspection  of all signals by 
day and night  in both Up and Down directi ons once a month53 over 
his entire jurisdiction . During the inspection he shall take special  
notice of the following :  
i) All signals have adequate visibility as specified preferably from 
the driver's side of the foot -plate . If the visibility of a signal  is 
                                                           
53 Para 3.3 of Signal Engineering  Manual  Vol.I  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
391 
For internal use of IA&AD  affected by growing tree branches or other obstructions, the matter 
shall be specially noted. Cases requiring special  attention, such as 
trees in private  lands shall be referred to the Divisional  Signal  and 
Telecommunication  Engineer  with full particulars of the 
topography of the area for his information, necessary act ion and 
instructions . In other cases the Inspector  shall arrange to remove 
the obstructions as early as possible.  
ii) Anything which may endanger safety  or interfere with signaling  
gears. In such cases the matter shall be brought to the notice of the 
concerned department. If immediate action  is necessary for 
reasons of safety, the train may be stopped at the next station for 
giving necessary information to the St ation  Master . 
IV) Failures  : 
a) The SSE (Signal)  shall monitor daily all failures on his section . 
During his periodical  inspection  he shall ch eck up the cause indicated 
as well as repairs  carried out to ensure that similar faults do not recur. 
In case of failures of a serious nature, the investigation shall be carried 
out immediately, and the SSE (Signal) be advised.  
b) Each SSE (S ignal)  shall at the end of every month , summari ze and 
classify the failure  reports  received from each m aintainer and submit 
monthly  failure  report on Form S & T /FS2/ with his remarks to the 
Divisional  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer  in duplicate. 
Failures  pertaining to other departments  shall be promptly brought to 
the notice of the concerned departments.  
V) Reports  of Maintainers :  
a) The S SE (Signal ) shall ensure that the Maintainers are regular in their 
maintenance  programme  and their reports  in Form S & T/MR  
(Annexure '1', Para  11.3.1 of Signal & Engineering  Manual  Part II ) 
are correctly maintained.  
b) Maintainers' programmes shall be prepared in terms of the days of the 
week. The programme  shall be so prepared that i t is convenient to the 
Maintainer and provides for maximum  time at every station with due 
regard to the rostered hours of the duty . As far as practicable the 
programme  shall include allowance for picking up programme  missed 
during the week on account  of failures and other exigencies.  
3.3.2 Telecommunication  
I) Similarly, the telecommunication  work  on each d ivision is divided into 
Sr. Section  Engineer /Section Engineer/Junior  Engineer.  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
392 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) On a division, each SSE /SE/JE  shall be responsible to the Divisional  
Signal  & Telecommunication  Engineer /Sr. Divisional Signal & Telecom  
Engineer through the Assistant  Signal & Telecommunication  Engineer, 
for effici ent maintenance  and correct installation of all 
telecommunication  equipment  under his charge.  
III) The essential duties of SSE /SE/JEs are: - 
a) Inspection  and efficient maintenance  of telegraph  and telephone  
equipment  such as keys, sounders, relays, junction  boards, 
teleprinters, magneto, central  battery and auto exc hanges, telephone  
repeaters and other telecommunication  installations at large stations  
including wireless  installations. Indicators, Public  address System , 
Interactive  Voice Response System, Optical  Fibre  System, Message  
Switching  System, Computer  Communication , Train  Radio 
Communication.  
b) Execution of all works  involving alterations to the existing 
installations, and installations of new  equipment , its adjustment and 
connections.  
c) Carrying out periodical  tests on line  wires  independently as well as 
jointly with the officials of the BSNL department.  
IV) Staff Under SSE/SE   
a) Each SSE /SE shall be assisted by one or more JE , where necessary, 
and Techn icians shall be provided under him for maintenance . The 
strength  of JE and Technicians shall be fixed  in accordance with the 
density of work  and other local  conditions.  
b) Each JE  must be provided with a gang for attending to works  that may 
be considered normally beyond the scope  of the Technicians.  
c) Each JE  may be provided with office clerks depending on the quantum 
of office work . An office khalasi may be provided, where necessary.  
d) Where railway ’s underground telecommunication  cables including 
Optical  Fibre  exist (as in electrified areas), a cable  break -down 
transport  such as a pick up van shall be provided. An emergency  gang 
with full complement of cable  jointing materials , tools  and testing  
equipment ’s should be available with the break -down vehicle . 
V) Construction  Organisation  
a) The Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer  (Construction ) 
shall provide necessary direction and control  for the efficient and 
economical execution  of all works  under his charge. The Chief Signal 
and T elecommunication Engineer (Construction) is assisted at the 
Headquarters  by a team of Officers who may consist of Deputy  Chief 
Signal and Telecommunication Engineers , Senior  Signal and 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
393 
For internal use of IA&AD  Telecommunication Engineers and Assistant  Signal and 
Telecommunication Engineers,  
b) The Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer  (Construction ) 
maintains liaison  with the Open  Line Organisation  and shall follow 
the general policies and procedure laid  down for the execution  of 
works . In cases w here a different policy  or procedure becomes 
necessary to be followed, he does so after due consultation with the 
Open Line  Organisation to adopt an accepted policy or procedure.  
c) The Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer  (Construction ) 
shall exercise necessary budgetary  control  within the allotment of 
funds at his disposal  and shall co -ordinate  with the Chief Signal and 
Telecommunication Engineer for compilation  of budget  at every 
budgetary  stage.  
d) The Chief  Signal  and Telecommuni cation  Engineer  (Construction ) 
shall co -ordinate  with the Chief Signal and Telecommunication 
Engineer with regards to the placement of personnel for the various 
assignments under his charge keeping in view the overall career 
development  of such personnel.  
e) In the case of certain major  joint projects  for Survey , or construction , 
the Signal  and Telecommunication  unit may be constituted as a self 
contained unit  under the administrative control  of the head  of the 
Project . In such cases,  the Head of the Signal and Telecommunication 
Branch  is responsible for co -ordination  with the Chief  Signal and 
Telecommunication Engineer . 
VI) Extra  Divisional  Organisation   
a) The following are the extra Divisional  Organisations  of the Signal  and 
Telecommunication  Department  on the Railways  :— 
i) Signal  and Telecommunication  Workshops  ; 
ii) Signal  and Telecommunication  Training  School ;  
iii) Microwave  Organi sation ; 
iv) Field Units  of Construction  Organisation ; 
v) Any other unit  designated by the railway . 
b) Each of these Organisations  is under  the control  of an Officer of 
appropriate  grade who is responsible for its efficient functioning to 
the Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineer /Chief Signal and 
Telecommunication Engineers  (Construction ) directly or through an 
Officer of the Headquarters  Office  in the appropriate grade. The 
controlling Officer may be assist ed by a team of officers in various 
grades as required.   
Keeping in view of guidelines  in chapter 3 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines , 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
394 
For internal use of IA&AD  universe of Apex , Auditable  and implementing entity of Electrical  Department  
be defined and planned for audit  accordingly . 
4. CRITERIA FOR IDENTIFICATION OF APEX, AUDIT AND 
IMPLEMENTING UNITS  
As per instruction made for Department  Centric  Audit  derived from Compliance  
Audit Guidelines , there are three levels for performing audit  keeping in view of 
their structure and nature of work , they are  
I)   Apex  units  
II)   Audit  units , and  
III)   Implementing  units  
All above three units  may be defined according to the working/structure 
stipulated with reference of the following Codes /Manuals : 
I) Signal  Engineering  Manual , Part – I 
II) Signal  Engineering  Manual , Part – II 
III) Telecommunication  Engineering  Manual  
IV) Indian  Railway  Code  for Financial  Department , Vol. I  & II 
V) Indian  Railway  Code  for Engineering  Department  
VI) General  Conditions of Contract  (GCC ) 
VII) Action Plan 2022 (Signal  and Telecom .) 
VIII) Accident  Manual  
IX) JPO/Guidelines /Instructio ns/Circulars  issued by Railway  Board  and 
Zonal  Railway, etc.  
Apex  Units : Those units  which are related to policy  formulation and involved in 
looking after/monitoring  of implementation  of policies and situated at Railway  
Board /Zonal  level may be considered as Apex Units. E.g. O/o PCSTE  (In open 
line organisation  at Zonal level), CSTE  (In construction  organisation) and any 
other Production  Units having independent  charge.  
Audit  Units : These units  are mainly responsible for implementation  of policies 
made by Railway  Board /Zonal  office with th e help of implementing units. These 
units are situated in Divisions  as field offices under jurisdiction  of zonal 
headquarter   e.g. O/o Sr.DSTE . 
Implementing  Units : Implementing units  are those units which are directly 
responsible for compliance  of activities in the field offices other than zone or 
Divisions  as per policy  made by Railway  Board /Zonal  offices under supervisory 
control  of Divisional  offices. e.g. DSTE /ASTE  having independent  charge in 
field whic h are responsible for reporting to Divisional offices and SSEs /JEs under 
their jurisdiction . 
 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
395 
For internal use of IA&AD  5. LIST OF ACTIVITIES AT MINISTRY AND FIELD LEVEL  
5.1 Zonal  Level  
I) Signal  
a) Implementation of Policy  matters, Performance  of Signalling  assets , 
reliability improvement action  plan, Punctuality , Accidents and 
Safety  Audit  on signalli ng. 
b) Co-ordination  with Divisional  Sub-ordinate offices, General  Manager  
(GM ), Director  General  (S&T ), Chairman - Railway  Board  (CRB ), 
etc. 
c) Co-ordination  with Construction /Works /Project /Railway  
Electrification  organization  for quality  installations of Signalling  
assets  as per target set and also regarding maintenance  of signalling  
assets .  
d) Correspondence regarding Signal  Standards  Committee  dealing and 
RDSO  references  of Signal matters.  
e) Joint  Procedure  Orders related to Signalling  matters.  
f) Follow up action  on inspection  notes  of CRB , Board  Members , 
CCRS , CRS , GM and AGM.  
g) Safety  committee  review meeting and follow up . 
h) Dealing with Work  study report on signalling . 
i) Procurement  and Distribution  of Stock  and Non -stock  Signalling  
materials . 
j) Training  management  for Gazetted  and Non -Gazetted offic ials. 
II) Telecommunication  
a) All policy  matters and correspondence on telecommunication  
including those for PRS /FOIS /UTS /Internet /Computer /CUG -
Mobile /BSNL  Phones/Intercoms/ Conference facilities and Passenger  
Amenity System  etc. 
b) Performance  of all communication  systems including management  of 
telecommunication  equipment  failures, reliability improvement, 
action  plan for telecom  systems.  
c) Liaison  with RAILTEL , BSNL , DFCCIL , Airtel  and Reliance  and 
follow up  actions.  
d) Joint  Procedure  Orders related to Telecom  matters.  
e) Setting up of communication  facilities as per disaster management  
plan in case of accidents , Co -ordination  for implementation  of 
recommendations  of High  level committee  on disaster management , 
Arrangement for VIP  functions .  
f) Procurement  and Distribution  of Stock  and Non -stock  Telecom  
materials . 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
396 
For internal use of IA&AD  In addition to above, some common activities are also performed at zonal level, 
which are as under:  
i) Planning  of Signalling  and Telecommunication  works  
(PWP /FWP /WP/M&P ). 
ii) Man Power  Planning  and productivity  of S&T  staff. 
iii) All matters pertaining to issue /approval  of Engg.  Scale  Plans, 
Signalling  Plans, Locking Tables, Circuit  Diagrams , etc. for Open  
Line/Works /Projects / Construction , RE  & RVNL , DFCCIL  and 
RAILTEL  organizations . 
iv) Issue  of typical SIP, ST , Wiring Diagrams , Check  lists related to 
design  to comply day to day instructions  of Railway  Board  and 
RDSO . 
v) Preparation  of Narrative  Reports  and Year Book for Signal  and 
Telecom  deptt.  
vi) Examination  of S&T  Survey  reports  and implementation  of 
recommendations . 
vii) Dealing with establishment matters pertaining to S&T  staff. 
5.2 At Divisional  level  
The following activities are performed at Divisional  level to look after 
compliance  of: 
I) Providing guidance  to field units  for maintenance  of signalling  and 
telecom  assets . 
II) AMC  for signalling  and telecom  equipment  (wherever required) and 
other related maintenance  issue . 
III) Management  of Equipment  failures, Pun ctuality , Reliability 
Improvement Action Plan  for signalling . 
IV) Attending Punctuality  meeting with DRM /ADRM.  
V) Co-ordination  with respect to PCDO  to PCSTE , Performance  review, 
follow up  action  on PCDO received from field units . 
VI) Correspondence with HQ  for signalling  and telecom  matters.  
VII) Reply to Parliamentary  questions , VIP  reference, RTI  reference, etc.  
VIII) Follow up action  of Railway  Safety  Review recommendations  and 
recommendations  of Commissioner  of Railway Safety (CRS ). 
IX) Follow up action  on Inspection  Notes  of CRB , Board  Members , GM , 
DRM , CSTE  and other senior officers, Audit  and Accounts  Inspection 
Notes.  
X) All establishment matters i.e. recruitment  of staff , training , posting 
and transfer, deputation , creation/extension of posts , D&AR , Court  
cases etc.  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
397 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Coordination  with regards to Conference and Works  Review meeting 
etc. 
XII) Material  Management  of Signalling  and Telecom . Materials  for 
maintenance  and works  being executed by the divisions  including 
development  of special  signalling  equipment /items, Stock  sheet for 
signalling . 
XIII) Review of progress of all signalling  and telecom  works  (GB, PB, LB 
and Revenue ) in the Division  including CTR works . 
XIV)  Coordination  with Construction , Project  and Works  organization  etc. 
regarding progress of signalling  works , taking over of maintenance  of 
signalling  works  after commissioning . 
XV) Review of work  related to Drawings  i.e. upkeep  of updated Signal  
Interlocking  Plan (SIP), Circuit /Wiring Diagrams , Selection  Tables 
and incorporation of latest changes.  
XVI)  Upkeep of Signalling  database of all station regarding availability of 
cable  core plan, cable  route  plan, relay disposition chart, Signal  
infringement  to schedule  of dimension, precise inter signal  distance.  
XVII)  Upkeep of Manuals  i.e. GR &SR , SEM and Block  Working Manuals 
along with correction.  
XVIII)  Budgetary  control  over Revenue  and Works  budget  for PH -33 & PH -
17 etc. and coordination  with respective controlling departments  for 
other plan heads.  
XIX)  Review of Works  programme , M&P  programme , LAW Book, 
Deposit  works  for signalling  items.  
XX) Coordination  with the Field units  and other Departments  for timely 
completion  of Engg; Electrical  and other work  related with  projects  
under his control .  
XXI)  Ensure manning of Signal /Control  at officers level in case of 
accidents , Monitoring  of all accidents  and fo llow up  on accident  
reports  and reporting to HQ . 
XXII)  Liaison  with RAILTEL , BSNL  and Department  of 
Telecommunication , Regular  coordination  meeting with officials of 
BSNL and other Private  Telecom  Service , RTCC meeting and follow 
up action  of PTCC cases and their follow up  cases.  
XXIII)  Monitoring  performance  of communication  infrastructure  and 
passenger  amenities  like e nquiry telephones, IVRS, display boards, 
announcement system  etc. 
XXIV)  Setting up of communication  facilities in ART  in case of any accidents  
as per Disaster  Management  Plan. 
XXV)  Scrutiny  of Control  and Bock interruptions, functioning of telephones 
exchange, administrative trunk lines – their analysis  and expeditious 
rectification.  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
398 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXVI)  Compilation , correction, printing and distribution  of telephone  
directories.  
XXVII)  Development /procurement  and upkeep  of backup of all software  and 
comp uter programmes relating to all application  in S&T  department.  
XXVIII)   Computerization , Data  networking and software  development . 
XXIX)  Maintenanc e and up gradation of website -correspondence with CRIS . 
5.3 At Field level  
In other than Zone/Divisional  level, DSTE /ASTE  of field units  are responsible 
for- 
I) Reporting to Sr. DSTE  and will be responsible for all aspects of safe  and 
efficient maintenance  of signalling  and telecom  assets  in the section . 
II) Statutory  inspection  and Safety  checks  and monitoring  inspection of 
Inspector  under his control . 
III) Passenger ’s complaints  in regard to assets  and system  under their 
jurisdiction . 
IV) Safety  counselling  of staff  and supervisors  under its jurisdiction . 
V) Attending accident  site under their jurisdiction . 
VI) Co-ordination  with their counterparts of other department at their level for 
improvement in functioning of S&T  gears.  
VII) Staff  grievances  and welfare  under their jurisdiction . 
Duties of Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineers  (SSEs ) 
The Signal  and Telecommunication  Engineers  in-charge of maintenance  and 
construction  are generally responsible for  
I) The installation and maintenance  of al l Signalling  and 
Telecommunication  equipment  under their charge in a satisfactory and 
safe condition.  
II) Observance of the rules  and procedures laid  down in  the General  and 
Subsidiary  Rules, Rules for opening of a Rly. the Signal  Engineering  
Manual  and orders and circulars  issued by the Chief  Signal 
&Telecommunication  Engineer  from time  to time  and ensuring that all 
staff under their charge are acquainted with relevant rules  and working 
method and ef ficiently perform their allotted duties.  
III) Preparation  of plans  and estimates  and safe  execution  of works  in their 
charge.  
IV) Ensuring that all important inspection  notes  of higher authorities  receive 
prompt action . 
V) Coordination  with Engineering  and other branches in case of combined 
works , obtai ning sanction of Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  for new  
signalling  works  or alterations and additions to the existing signalling  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
399 
For internal use of IA&AD  installatio ns either separately for purely signalling  works  or jointly with 
other departmental  officers in the case of combined works .  
VI) Coordination  with concerned branches in ca se of accidents  for speedy 
restoration of traffic  and for investigation into the causes of accidents .  
VII) Coordination  with officers and staff  of other branches in all othe r matters 
to ensure smooth functioning of signalling  and telecommunication  
systems.  
VIII) Ensuring supply  of approved  materials  and tools  for the instal lation and 
maintenance  of the equipment .  
IX) Control  over expenditure  in relation to budget  allotment and sanctioned  
estimate . 
X) Submiss ion of proposals for Revenue  and Works  Budget  and for periodic 
reviews.  
XI) Exercise of such powers as may be delegated to them in establishment 
and other matters.  
XII) Ensuring strict discipline amongst their staff  within the framework of the 
rules .  
XIII) Dealing promptly with appeals and representations from the staff  and 
looking after the welfare  of their staff .  
XIV)  Issue  of special  and specific maintenance  schedule  for SSE /SE/JE (S) and 
Technicians as and when necessary.  
XV) Transfer  of Charge : Instructions  on Transfer  of Charge are contained in 
Chapter I of Indian  Railways  Code  for Engineering  Department . The 
Senior  Divl. Signal  and Telecom . Engineer  handing over and taking over 
charge of a Divisional  or of a work  shall carry out joint inspection  of 
important sections as necessary. The 'Transfer of Charge’ statement sh all 
be prepared in adequate number of copies signed by both and one copy 
shall be sent to the Chief  Signal and Telecom. Engineer.  
Thus, the  List of Activities  being done by the Department  at the Ministry  as well 
as field level can be tabulated as under -  
Level of 
unit Main activity  Allied/ sub activity  
RB Framing of policy  in 
regard to signalling  & 
telecommunication  
equipment . 
Procurement  of advanced 
safety  equipment  
pertaining to S&T  
department.  Sanction  & approval  of projects . 
Sanction  of project estimates . 
Sanction  to import  technology  in 
regard to signalling  & 
telecommunication . 
Sanction  of different program 
pertaining to signalling  
equipment  such as relay 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
400 
For internal use of IA&AD  To obtain advanced 
technologies  such as 
autom atic train 
protection , fog safety  
device, end of train 
telemetry  device & on -
board/online  condition 
monitoring  system . interlocking , track  circuiting, 
SSI etc.  
RB & 
Apex  Sanction  for procurement  
of equipment  & different 
types of signalling  cable . Sanction  by Railway  Board 
Sanctions  by the GM  of Zonal  
Railways  or the CAO  of CN 
Organisation  
Apex  & 
Field 
units  Preparation  and approval  
for implementation  of 
different projects  & 
programmes pertaining to 
signalling  & 
telecommunication  Preparation  & placement of 
purchase  orders pertaining to 
signal  equipment , cables & other 
allied systems.  
Intimation of details of the 
programme  for implementation  
to field offic es. 
Field unit  Maintenance  and renewal  
of Assets  and equipment  Track  circuiting  
Block  panel  
Level Crossing  Gates  
Automatic  Block  Signalling  
Cable, Gear, Axle  Counter  
Panel  Interlocking  
Repairs  & Overhauls of “Signal  
&Telecommunicatio n 
apparatus” in workshops . 
Codal  Life Register   Maintenance  of Register  for 
different equipment /machine  
/plants. 
Field unit  Execution of various 
works  Revenue  works  
Special  works  
Works  undertaken on deposit  
terms  
Apex  & 
Field 
units   IT Applications  System  software  embedded in 
EI, CTC , data logger , UFSBI etc.  
Application  software   
RB, Apex  
& Field 
units  Obtaining CRS  sanction  Initiation for CRS  sanction.  
Timely completion  of CRS  
inspection . 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
401 
For internal use of IA&AD  Attending to queries of CRS  
Obtaining of CRS  certificate . 
RB, Apex  
& Field 
units  Co-ordinate in 
compilation  of Accounts  
and Funds  certification  Budget  Estimation  (BG)  
August Review  
Revised  Estimation  (RE) 
Final Modification  (FM)  
RB, Apex  
& Field 
units  Manpower  management  Creation  of posts  
Placing Indents  for recruitment  
of personnel.  
Maintenance  of service  records 
of Group  ‘D’ employees . 
Pay & allowances  and Service  
matters.  
Apex  & 
Field 
units  
 Creation  of Assets  Panel interlocking  
Electronic  interlocking  
 Route  Relay  interlocking  (RRI).  
Automatic  Block  Signalling  
Provision  of Track  circuiting  
Cable laying -optical fibre  
6. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS WITH RESPECT TO 
ACTIVITIES  
The instruction laid  down in Para  3.10 and 3.11 of the Compliance  Auditing  
Guidelines  may be borne in mind.  
The ri sk analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the S&T  
Department : 
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) Number of Tender  cases/ Con tract cases/ other misc. cases.  
III) When last Audited  viz. audited  last one year/three year/five year/more 
than five year/never audited . 
IV) Result  of last Audit . 
V) Audit  perception based on Arrears viz. progress of works  with reference 
to expenditure . 
VI) Audit  perception based on News paper  publication, Complaints  lodged 
etc.  
The electronic  and computerized  railway  signalling  systems have replaced the 
existing mechanical systems, resulting in intelligent and automatic  high 
performance  systems. For the existing electrical and mechanical systems, 
empirical  approaches and engineer’s intuition are mainly used to identify any 
faults, assuring a certain degree of safety  in the rai lway  signalling  systems. 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
402 
For internal use of IA&AD  However, the new  computerized  railway  signalling  systems do not allow the 
safety assurance based on such empirical approaches to  detect faults. Therefore, 
IEC (International Electro technical  Commission ) requires more rigorous safety 
activities to assure the safety in the railway  signalling  systems.  
The safety  activity of railway  signalling  systems defined by the international  
standards  means a series of all activities which find and eliminate potential 
hazards embedded in the railway  signalling  systems being developed, or 
establish measures  so that they can be reduced to below allowable level and 
reflect them to the design  and development  of system . 
Risk is a combination of accident  severity and accident  frequency . Accident  
frequency  may be calculated by hazard fre quency  and the probability of a hazard 
developing into an accident . This probability is derived by taking into account  
the effectiveness  of barriers. Barriers  are und erstood as any means to prevent, 
control  or mitigate undesired events or accidents . Barriers must be under the 
control  of the organization  operating the system  as they ha ve to be enforced 
during operation . They can be of different origin, e.g. human actions, operational  
barriers and technical  barriers.  
Risk  Parameters : 
Sl.No.  Parameter  Description  
1 Interface   Data  interface  between wayside 
equipment  and on -board equipment  
 Communication  interface  between the 
wayside operator and ve hicle  driver  
 Data  interface  between sub -systems  
 Data  interface  between related systems  
 Communication  interface  between the 
wayside operato r (system ) and maintainer  
2. Time   Train  operation  time based on the train 
schedule  
 Operation time  of the on -site facilities  
 Software  data processing  time 
 Generally defined time  
3 Action   Operation of operator, driver, maintainer  
 Action of on -site facilities  
 Action of on -board equipment  
4 Limit   Limit to the train speed  
 Limit to the line  capacity  
 Limit to the software  data processing  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
403 
For internal use of IA&AD   Limit to the human labour   
 Limit to the availability and reliability of 
facility  
5 Procedure   Operation, driving, maintenance  
procedu re 
 Countermeasure procedure at emergency  
6 Outside   Natural phenomena (earthquake, storm, 
snow, rain, etc.)  
 Passenger  behaviour  
 Pre-requisite to the intentional external 
obstacle  
7 Data    Control  command (train control , on-site 
facility control , etc.)  
 On-site information  
 Database information  
7. COMPUTERISED APPLICATION SOFTWARE AND ITS 
UTILISATION BY THE DEPARTMENT  
(To perform the various functions  (use of reports /data/ information generated 
periodically as an aid for Audit  of various activities of Departments  concerned.)  
 Signal  and Telecommunication  Departm ent use following type of software - 
I) System  Software: - S&T  Department  use executive  software  which are 
embedded in EI , CTC , data logger , UFSBI etc. These are OEM  specific 
and are used for functioning of the equipment  and fixed  in nature.  
II) Application  Software: -Application software  of EI  and data logger  are 
yard specific. These are developed by OEMs. EI application  software  are 
used for various applications  like Signal  Passed at Danger (SPAD ), point 
flashing under wheel opening of Relay  Room etc.  
Railways , which operate in a dynamic and constantly changing environment, 
requires a continuous update of Information  about Current  Status and Location 
of their Assets  for the optimum  utilization of Material  Resources . Information 
Resource is a critical Managerial Tool  for tackling the Business  Challenges on 
a Real -time Basis. Railways being Multi -location, Multi -function and Multi -
division organization  provide an ideal backdrop for Computer  Networks. 
Railways being an age -old industry , finds many of its existing Business and 
Operational Practices inadequate for adjusting in the current  fast changing 
Business environment. If the Railways can exploit Inf ormation Technology  to 
modernize their Operations  and practices to suit the needs of their customers , 
they can gain tremendous competitive advantage in the present and future 
business envi ronment.  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
404 
For internal use of IA&AD  Realizing the important role that Information  plays in Railways  Operations , IR 
had embarked on its Computerization  Program, earlier than many other 
organiza tions  in the country.  
The main applications  which are in use are - 
Computerized  Passenger  Reservation  System  (PRS ), Freight  Operat ions 
Information  System  (FOIS ), Integrated Pay Roll Accounting System  and Railnet . 
Besides these mainstream Applications , by using Information  Technology , the 
Management  Information System  as well as Decision Support System also can 
be improved and be made very efficient applying applicatio ns given below:  
7.1  MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM  
For running  any Business  Organization , the efficiency  of the MIS is very 
important. Indian  Railw ays have many areas, where use of IT  can have a telling 
effect. Some of the areas are:  
I) Personnel  Management  Information  System   
II) Materials  Management  Information  System  
III) Asset  Management  Information  System   
IV) Finance  Management  Infor mation  System   
V) Health  Management  Information  System   
VI) Passenger  Information  System   
VII) Project  Management  Information  System   
VIII) Law Management  Information  System   
IX) Training  Management  Inform ation  System   
X) Disaster  Management  Information  System   
XI) Transport  Management  Information  System  
As we are working on the fields related to Signal  and Telecommunication  
(S&T ) Department  of Railway , as such the applications  which  may be utilized 
or are being utilized by S&T department are as follows which may help in audit : 
7.2 Use of IT  (IMM IS/IREPS ) in Materials  Management  :  
Registration  of 
Demands  & Case File  
Opening  All Requisitions  are to be monitored by checking the 
Date of Registration  and date of Case file  Opening  
Tender  management  Status of a Tender  case is to be continuously 
monitored by checking progress of the case  from 
Data  base 
Monitoring  of 
Purchase  Cases  Once a Purchase  Order is issued, the case is to be 
followed until the material  is delivered and Bill  is 
passed.  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
405 
For internal use of IA&AD  Security  and Earnest 
Money  Deposit  
Monitoring   Some firms, registered under Small Scale  Industries , 
are relaxed from paying EMD .  This is to be checked 
and others should not get this facility.  
Updating 
Specifications of Stock  
Items  Lates t Specifications must be recorded for getting 
Optimum  benefit from the purchase . 
Stores  Budget  & 
Funds  Register  Budget  and Funds  should matched.  
Processing of Rate  
Contract  Purchase  Monitoring  is to be done to check whether the Rate  
Contract  is still valid or not.  
Demand /Req uirement 
Management  Check  whether Demand  is genuine.  
Local  Purchase  of 
Stock  & Non  stock  
items  Local  Purchase  should be as per the Norms  only.  
Scrap  Classification  Classification  of Scraps is essential before sending 
the Materials  to Scrap  Depot . 
Stock  Verification  Stock  Verification  is to be kept upto date.  
Use of IT  (IMM IS/IREPS ) in Materials  Management  
For extracting Maximum Output from the Assets  in any Business , elaborate 
Data  is to be maintained regarding all aspects of them.  IT  can help in this field 
by keeping track  of the following points:  
I) Nomenclature  of the Asset  
II) Specification No.  
III) Purchase  Order No.  
IV) Name and Address of the Supplier  
V) Cost  
VI) Place and Date of installation  
VII) Vital spare part, whether available  
VIII) Expected date  of Replacement  
IX) Failure  History  at a glance  
X) Alternative Supplier, if any  
Keeping all these information in the Computer  will enable the Maintenance  staff 
to monitor the Perfo rmance  of the Assets  in the Section .  Requirement of 
Periodical  update for the spare part Stock  Position, Rescheduling of Maintenance 
Programme  or Manpowe r as well as replacement  of old equipment  can be planned 
well in advance by employing an efficient Asset  Management . 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
406 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.3  IT (IRPSM ) in Project  Management  
Indian  Railways  continuously handle large and small Projects  for expanding the 
Transport  Network through New  Lines, Gauge  Conversion , Railway  
Electrification , S&T  Works  etc.  These Projects are not only to be identified in 
terms of Profitability, Criticality and Feasibility , but also are to be implemented 
most efficiently.  This asks for a thorough Project  Management , which would 
cover both Planning  as well as Implementation.  
A good p lan for Railw ay Project  requires that  
I) The Railway  Board  must sanction the Specific Estimate  with reference to 
the Scope of work  based on Site  condition.  
II) All drawings  and designs  must be ready well in advance.  
III) All concerned Departmental  Heads must involve themselves personally 
to study the Operational requirements and recommend any suggestions 
without chan ging the scope  of the work . There must be proper interaction 
between all the Departments . 
Since a Project , irrespective of whether it is commercially viable or not, must 
be planned in an integra ted way, use of Information  Technology , e.g. Software  
like MS -Project and use of RAILNET  for Data  collection, is very much 
required. Another  important point to be considered is that once the project is 
commissioned, monitoring  of Completion  of the residual  work  is to be 
continued. A good productivity  analy sis is not possible unless all relevant data 
are readily available. Here again, presence of IT  is appreciated.  
The field of consideration in Project  Management  are :  
Assessment  
of Residual  
work  The Residual  work , if any, is to be identified and a Review is 
to be done to see whether this can be dropped without affecting 
the need of the project. Any further requirement of funds is 
also to be identified at this stage.  
Booking  of 
Expenditures  Monitoring  is needed to check that all expenditures in a project 
are booked against the correct head  of Accounts . Thi s helps in 
assessing the Activity -wise expenditure  and can also be a basis 
for future investment . 
Realization 
of Credits  After the completion  of a project, the surplus  material , if any, 
is t be diverted to other works  and credits  are realized to the 
completed project, to reduce the net expenditure . Track  of all 
feasible credits  is, theref ore, an important aspect,  
Statement of 
variation in 
Quantity  Though the variation in contract  is considered normal, if it is 
restricted to within 25%, there are cases of crossing this limit. 
This is possible if proper monitoring  is not done after the 
project has started or at the extreme, the estimate  itself might 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
407 
For internal use of IA&AD  not be done with ground  realities. The variation can be tracked 
early, if data are continuously monitored using computers.  
Assessment  
of return 
from the 
Project  No project is ever planned without a cost  benefit analysis , 
based on the estimates  for both the investment  and the rate  of 
return. After the completion  of the project it is essential to 
analyze the actual results with reference to the estimate . This 
requires that the details of actual rate  of return  must be known.  
Clearance of 
Final Bills  This is very important for completion  of the project. Normally, 
the delay in clearing the final bills  is due to introduction of 
new non-schedule  items, non -finalization of final verification  
statements, non -finalization of disputes, non -cooperation from 
the contractors  or indifferent attitude. Monitoring  of all these 
would be easie r if data are in computers.  
Arbitration  
cases  After the Arbitration  Act, 1996 has come into existence, more 
opportunity is offered to the contractors  to seek arbitration . 
Two main points to notice are that a) if no Arbitration is 
permitted by the GM  within 30 days, the contractor can 
approach the court  for appointment  of an outsider as an 
arbitrator and b) Award of Arbit rator is difficult to the 
challenged. So, department must be vigilant to take care that 
no point for arbitration grows and if any point is there, 
settlement is to be done at the earliest.  
 
A nominated team should be posted against each project to monitor it, so that 
accountability and responsibility can be fixed  in case of any problem. This team 
must have access to IT  based project management  approach.  
7.4  IT in Training  Management  
A training  institute imparts training  through various modules , the course 
structure for which is designed depending on the requirement of the Railways . 
Nominations of the T rainees are received from the Railways well in advance, 
trainees are allotted Hostel  accommodations  on their arrival and Faculty  
members are allotted classes in different courses. All these can be effic iently 
handled by proper use of Information  Technology . Some of the fields are;  
I) Collection  of nominations from Railways  
II) Distribution  of course progr ammes to the railways  
III) Monitoring  of Hostel  accommodations  
IV) Maintaining a Question  Bank  
V) Database of Trainees attending courses  
VI) Database of result sheets  of trainees in different course  
VII) Database of feedback reports  from trainees  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
408 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) Data  warehousing  by the Faculty  embers  
IX) Networking of classrooms for downloading teaching materials  from 
server  
X) Video  conference  facility of extension lectures, seminars  and workshops  
XI) Tele teaching and distance learning  
XII) Remote access of library  information from hostels and classrooms  
7.5  IT in Disaster  Management  
Disaster  means an adverse situation causing a misfortune leading to a 
catastrophe, which results in loss  of human life and destruction. D isruption of 
normalcy suddenly plunges people into great suffering and a challenge emerges 
to provide emergency  relief  to the affected. Disaster may be caused by nature, 
in the forms of flood, cyclone, earthquake etc. or by  severe Railway  accidents . 
For the later type of disaster, only follow -up actions are possible. But for the 
disasters  caused by the nature, better preparedness and focused initiation of 
control  programme  can minimize the effects and losses.  
Management  for Disasters , caused by the nature can be divided into 
various phases;  
Pre-disaster 
phase  A contingency  plan is to be prepared in this phase and 
rehearsal of the same is vital to check any lacunae in it. A 
meticulously evolved plan would be able to minimize the 
extent of loss  
Alert  Phase  During this phase already the imminent danger is known and 
prompt action  drill can save many lives and reduce loss . 
Impact phase  Disaster  has already struck the community by this phase and 
no actual relief  is po ssible.  
Post Impact 
phase  Local  relief  is expected to reach the affected area immediately 
to be followed soon by outside relief. This phase may continue 
for several days together.  
Rehabilitation  
phase  This is long phase, bringing the community back to the 
original state.  
Some precautions are to be taken by Railways  to handle Nature caused Disaster  
Management .  Continuous  and close interaction with Local  Meteorological  
Department  for getting Real -time information regarding imminent Flood  or 
Cyclone .  Each Department must nom inate and form a Disaster Management 
Team, consisting of Experienced Officers and Supervisors and having 
sufficient Resources  and Communication  Equipment .  Proper  Monitoring  of 
Relief  measures  can be done via RAILNET  and any aid can be supplemented.  
Particularly in the case of Cyclones, when all other Terrestrial  lines may be 
inoperative , VSAT Communication installed in Accident  Relief Train  will be 
of much help.  
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
409 
For internal use of IA&AD  In the case of Railway  Accidents, the Accident  Relief  Trains reach the Site  
within no time  and Medical  Relief is ensured.  Communications are provided 
from Accident Site to Divisional  Head Quarters .  With the introduction of 
RAILNET , more communication  facilities like Video  Conference can be 
implemented.  More Real -time Information  from Accident Site would generate 
more confidence in the minds of Public . 
7.6  Control  Office  Application  (COA ) 
A data logger  is an electronic  device that records data over time  or in relation 
to location either with a built -in instrument  or sensor or via external instruments 
and sensors, hence Ministry  of Railways  has instructed Zonal  Railways to link 
the arrival and departure of trains  with Data  loggers . 
It has been an endeavour of Indian  Railways  to run  trains  punctually and 
provide information to their customers  more current  reliable and accurate, with 
minimal human intervention. Data  loggers  were provided at stations  to monitor 
the status of functioning of signalling  gears. For train control , Optical  Fibre  
network  has also been laid  and linked to control  centers of the Divisions .  
It was decided to utilize these data loggers  for capt uring trains  running  
information and update Control  Office  Application  (COA ) automatically at the 
central  server. For this purpose, to start with,  the data loggers  of one terminal  
station and one more station at each zonal railway  is linked with COA through 
optical fiber backbone for automatically picking up the train running  status.  
7.7 Centralized  Traffic  Control  
Centralized  traffic  control (CTC ) or Traffic  control system (TCS ) is a block  
system under which tra in movements are authorized by block signals whose 
indications supersede the superiority of trains for both opposing and following 
movements on the same track.  
Further, train movements are controlled by signal indication, usually by a 
dispatcher at a remo te location via codeline, modem , or data radio.  
Brief summary of Centralized  Traffic  Control is as under :  
I) CTC  allows for a safe, efficient, and cost effective means of controlling 
trains.  
II) CTC  increases track capacity and train speed by expediting train 
movement by lining routes and clearing signals prior to a train’s arrival at 
a control point.  
III) CTC  allows a single dispatcher or control operator to manage a large 
section o f track, interconnected signals and control points.  
IV) CTC  allows a redundant safety system to prevent unsafe requests being 
sent to the field control point . 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
410 
For internal use of IA&AD  8. COMPREHENSIVE CHECK LISTS FOR CHECK OF 
V ARIOUS ACTIVITIES  
(Including  General  Checklist as well as activity specific check list)  
Checks  to be exercised by the Audit  teams while undertaking Audit at Apex , 
Audit and implementing Unit  level using application  software  being used by 
the Department  
Audit  check lists may include the following detail –  
8.1  Audit  of Works  Programme  
 Please refer to para no. 7.1  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Engineering  Department ). 
8.2  Audit  of Sanctions  of Work : 
Please refer to para no. 7.2  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  Department ). 
8.3  Audit  of S&T  Works  
Audit  Review of the following may be provided as per the provisions of S&T  
Works  given in SEM -  
I) Review of Tenders   
II) Advances  to Contractors  
III) Review of On -Account  Bills , Final Bills  and Completed Contracts  
IV) Audit  Of Measurement  Books  
V) Material  Modification  
VI) Contractors’ Ledger  (Cf 1483 -E) 
VII) Completion  Reports / Completion Estimates / Completion Statements (see 
para 1701 -1714 -E)   
VIII) Works  Registers and Revenue  Allocation  Registers.  
IX) Pay Order and other Vouchers  not Falling under an y Definite Category  
(Misc . Vouchers)  
X) Audit  Of Journal  Vouchers  (Cf. 30 7 & 308 -A1) 
XI) Objectionable Items Register  
8.4  Audit  of Abandoned  Assets :  
Please refer to para no. 7.18  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
8.5  Audit  of Codal  Life Register   
This may be examined to see that - 
I) Register  has been maintained as per para 219 -F-I. 
II) In this register  codal  life of the machine  and plant at different locations 
should be entered with the d etails viz. date of commissioning  codal life, 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
411 
For internal use of IA&AD  date of renewal , date of condemnation, date of AMC , date attended by the 
maintenance  staff and other cheques  given in the para 219 -F-I. 
8.6 Audit  of Imprest  Stores  Accounts  
Imprest  Stores  of S&T  department & Plant  reserve, Audit  should be conducted 
with reference to the rules  in Chapters XVIII  and XIX-S. 
8.7 Audit  of Law  Charges  
Please refer  to para no. 7.37  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
8.8 Audit  of Manpower  Mana gement  
Please refer to para no. 7.37  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
8.9  Audit  of World Bank  Aided Projects  
Please refer to para no. 7.38  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
8.10 Audit  of Public  Private  Partnership  Projects  
Please refer to para no. 7.39  of chapter 6  (Audit  of Civil  Engineering  
Department ). 
8.11 Audit  of Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  (CRS ) Sanctions  
It should be seen that: - 
I) Whether CRS  sanctio n has been obtained, wherever it is required, as per 
existing norms . 
II) The CRS  final report should be reviewed to see that –  
a) The recommendations  are complied with in time . 
b) The circumstances unde r which such lapses as reported by the CRS  
are not anticipated and done during execution  of a project/ work  
The expenditure  involved in carrying out the lapses pointed out by the CRS  does 
not exceed the cost  of sanctioned  estimate  requiring approval  of higher authority . 
I) Checks  to be exercised by Audit  teams during Audit of  Finance  & 
Appropriation  Accounts  may be provided as under -  
The Revenue  expenditure  incurred by S&T  department of Railway  falls under t he 
heads are given as under :  
 
 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
412 
For internal use of IA&AD  Demand  
No. Abstract  Name of Demand  Minor  
Head  Name  
3 A General  
Superintendence  and 
Services  800 Signal  and 
Telecommunication  
Management  
7 E Repairs  and 
Maintenance  Plant  
and Equipment  100 Establishment  in offic es 
500 Plant  and Equipment  
(Signalling ) 
600 Plant  and Equipment  
(Telecommunication ) 
700 Rental to P&T for 
signalling  and 
telecommunication  
circuits  
8 F Operating  Expenses, 
Rolling  stock  and 
equipment  700 Signalling  and 
Telecommunication  
12 K Miscellaneous  
Working Expenses  500 Cost of Training  staff 
**14 M Appropriation  to 
Funds  100 Appropriation  to 
Depreciation  Reserve  
Fund  
500 Appropriation  to 
Accident  Compensation , 
Safety  and Passenger  
Amenity Fund  
Similarly , the source of financing will be indicated in the beginning by the 
following alphabets for the expenditures incurred other than Revenue  expenditure  
as under:  
P – Capital , Q – DRF , R – OLWR , S – DF, T – ACF  & U – Revenue  
As such, classification  of Capital  and other Works  expenditure  would be as 
under :  
 
 
 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
413 
For internal use of IA&AD  Demand  Name of 
Demand  Head  Name  
16 Assets , 
Acquisition , 
Construction  
and 
Replacement  1100  New  Lines (Construction ) 
1400  Gauge  Conversio n 
1500  Doubling  
1600  Traffic  facilities, Yard  
remodelling and others  
3300  Signalling  and 
Telecommunication  works . 
3400  Taking over of line  wires  from 
P&T department  
3500  Electrification  Projects . 
Points to be seen during the check of the Finance  Accounts  : 
I) It should be e nsure that the figures of Receipts  and Outgoings of the 
Account  Current  (to the end of the month ) with the Schedules  appended 
with the Account  Current  is tallying or not.  
II) It may be ensured that figures depicted in the Account  Current  are 
rounded off to the nearest rupee.  
III) Statement of Works  Expenditure  - Grant  No.80 -MH 5002  - the figures 
exhibited  therein, should be in Unit  of Rupees. It may please be ensured 
that Annexure -A to the Works  Grant  (with figures in Unit of Rupees) has 
been appended with the Account  Current . 
IV) Normally, there should not be any minus transaction in the Account  
Current . In case there is any such transaction(s), it should be ensured that 
reasons are given in the Annexure to the Account Current . 
V) It should be ensured that Voted  and Charged  Expenditure  has been shown 
separately in the Schedules  and tallies with the figures given in the 
Account  Current . 
VI) The figures of expenditure  under Major  Head -2016  should be reconciled 
with the figures sent to Director  General  of Audit /Central  Expenditure , 
New  Delhi  and Headquarters  Office  (BRS section ). 
VII) Any new  item of receipt  and expenditure  appearing under Misc . Receipt  
and Misc. Expenditure  may be properly investigated with reference to 
accounting principles . 
VIII) The balances appearing in Debt Head  Report  finally gets exhibited in the 
Balance Sheet  of the Railway /Unit . It is, therefore, necessary that the 
accuracy  of the Debt Head Report is scrutinized carefully. It  may be 
ensured that the balances are worked out by taking into account  the 
closing balance  of the previous year, prior period adjustments  i.e. 
T.W.F.A . at the beginning of year and net of  the Receipts  and 
Disbursements as appearing in the Account  Current  at the end of the year. 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
414 
For internal use of IA&AD  It may also be ensured that balances are supported by age -wise analysis  
and item wise details.  
Points to be seen during the review of the Appropriation  Accounts .  
For examination of Appropriation  Accounts , chapter on Accounts Department 
may be referred to.  
Major  activities of signal & telecommunication department being carried 
out and checklists are as under: - 
8.12  Signalling   
I) Moderisation of Signalling assets  
Multiple Aspect Colour Light Signalling (MACL) Mechanical  signals of 
Semaphore type  are progressively replaced by Electrical signalling with 
Multiple Aspect Colour Signals (MACL). MACL signals have better 
visibility, quick operation and less maintenance.  
II) Interlocking of different stations :- 
a) Route Relay Interlocking (RRI ) and Central  Control Panels in signal 
control system - By mere operations of knobs and route buttons, routes 
are set automatically and signals are cleared with absolute safety. The 
entire station is track circuited. Points and signals are o perated by 
individual knobs/slides in small yards.  
b) Panel Interlocking system - Unlike Route relay interlocking, in panel 
interlocking points and signals are operated individually. This is being 
adopted in smaller wayside stations .  
c) Solid S tate Interlocking - As a technological development, the solid 
state with electronics system having software  programming, solid -
state interlocking signalling control system is being now inducted to 
achieve economy  and flexibi lity. This sophisticated microprocessor 
based interlocking system works through Microprocessor devices and 
software programming. In this system there is less number of relays 
and alterations/additions in the yard is possible without much extra 
wiring.  
d) Automatic Block  Signalling with Continuous  Track  Circuiting 
Automatic: - Block signalling systems are mostly used when the train 
traffic  become more congested and busy, especially in suburban area 
and to increase line capacity. This eliminates block  working and trains 
are signalled automatically without much dependence on human 
element. This ensures train safety, speed and also detects any rail 
discontinuity.  
e) Token less Block  working: - In the absolute block  system in single 
line, Token Block instruments are used. The token will be handed over 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
415 
For internal use of IA&AD  to the driver of train after granting line clear to enter in the Block 
section. The process of handing over of token at every station is time 
consuming and laborious resulting in token missing. The system of 
token less block working helps to increase line capacity on single line 
sections.  
f) LED signals for colour light signalling (LED): - In the colour light 
signals light a spects of mechanical signals are lit by incandescent 
bulbs. These bulbs have limited hours of working and get fused due 
to ageing and voltage fluctuations. The bulbs have to be replaced 
frequently. As an improvement, LED lit signals are now introduced. 
LED  signals are having longer life and better visibility. This type of 
signal has enhanced the reliability by reducing the incidences of signal 
lamp fusing. It also affords good visibility to the drivers and more 
signals are likely to be converted to LED sign als.  
g) Replacement of over aged assets: - Over aged signalling assets are 
normally to be replaced after a codal life of 25 years. Most of the 
signal systems are obsolete mechanical type and no spares are now 
available in the trade. The mechanical signals are  operated from the 
mechanical lever frame from cabin. Most of the signalling systems 
have become over -due for replacement. With the sanction of the 
Special Railway  Safety  Fund  the over aged assets are being repla ced 
on priority basis.  
h) Track  circuiting: - Track circuit detects the presence or absence of the 
train on the track. This is the backbone of the signalling system. This 
ensures complete safety to the train in case of human failure. Due to 
high utilisation of the track capacity, this ensures safe, speedy and 
punctual movement for train services.  
i) Level crossing: - The unmanned gates are taken up for manning where 
telephone facilities are provided from the nearest station so that gate 
will be close d well in advance before the train approaches the manned 
gates. LC gates are being taken up for interlocking on the basis of train 
vehicle units (TVUs) to ensure safety for both trains and road users.  
j) Train protection & Warning system: - This system will g ive 
information to the driver to regulate the train speed depending upon 
the aspect of the signal in advance. In case, the driver fails to do so, 
the train will be automatically stopped by applying brake without the 
intervention of the driver. This ensures  that whenever any train stops 
on the track, the following trains stop automatically, thus ensuring 
safety.  
k) Train Actuated Warning Device: -Whenever train approaches an 
unmanned level crossing, a hooters sounds giving warning to the road 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
416 
For internal use of IA&AD  users well in adva nce about the approach of the train thereby avoiding 
any accident.  
l) Networking of Data Loggers: - This is a modern equipment used for 
monitoring the operation of important functions  like Track  circuits, 
Points, Signals, Batte ry chargers, Batteries etc. installed in Panel 
interlocked/RRI installations. These are microprocessor -based 
equipment logging the events of the change of status of the various 
functions in field and relay rooms and recording the precise time also. 
The dat a loggers are useful devices for detecting the cases of passing 
the signal at danger by the driver and give important clues in case of 
accidents . The data loggers are also used as predictive maintenance 
tools regarding deterioration of th e performance  of signalling gadgets.  
m) Integrated  Power Supply System (IPS)/Non -conventional energy 
sources: - With the introduction of more and more modern Electrical 
Signalling Systems , the dependency on the power supply becomes 
more essential. To get reliable power supply, the concept of Integrated 
Power Supply (IPS) has been introduced wherein, the different signal 
power supplies like 110 AC, 110 VDC, 24 DC etc. are derived from 
the common system, whi ch works on common battery, i.e. DC -DC 
converter, modular power packs. This IPS will enhance the working 
of the signalling system especially in RE (Railway  Electrification) 
area.  
8.13  Telecommunication   
I) Train Control Communication :- Movement of each and every train is 
monitored by a controller at the nearest divisional Hqrs. Facility is also 
provided to the driver or guard to communicate with divisional Hqrs 
through portable telephone which can be easily connected to the overhead 
line wires which are running  parallel to the track or connected to the 
Emergency Telephone sockets provided at every KM in the section where 
controls are working through underground  cables. An emergency 
portable telephone is k ept in the Guard’s compartment of each and every 
train.  
II) Block  Circuits: - Running of trains in each section (between any two 
stations ) is controlled by block  circuits through which running  of onl y one 
train in a section at one time is ensured. Overhead lines of Railway  or 
BSNL and underground cables are used for this purpose.  
III) Optical Fibre Cable network :- Optical Fibre Cable is laid along the track 
to provide a rel iable and noise free communication. OFC network is 
widely used for Railway  Control Communication  taking advantage of its 
all long haul high bandwidth circuit interconnecting Railway Telephone 
Exchange. Passenger Reserv ation System, Unreserved Ticketing System, 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
417 
For internal use of IA&AD  Network Freight  Operating  Management  system have been transferred 
through railway OFC.  
IV) Railway  Telephone Network: - There is an in -house Railway  Telephone 
Network connecting all -important offices, officials, Way stations , 
Divisional Headquarters  & Zonal Head Quarters. Railway telephones 
exchanges are inter -connected through Railway OFC network , Railway 
Microwave network and are supported by rented BSNL channels as stand 
by.  
V) Wireless communication System: - Driver, Guard, Supervisors & officers 
of permanent way, Mechanical , Electrical and Signal & Telecom 
departments  are provided with 5 watts hand held walkie -talkies, which 
can be used to establish communication between moving train & adjacent 
stations . Every railway station is provided with 25 watts VHF set for this 
purpose.  
VI) Data network :- There is an exclusive PRS  network connecting with all the 
PRS centers of Railway  and other Metros. The centers are connected 
either through Railway OFC network or hired channels from BSNL. 
Similarly there is a Fre ight Operating  Management  System network for 
monitoring the movement of freight transport. Coach  Operation 
Information  System is a network for coach management  and this is under 
implementation.  
VII) Passenger Amenities  Safety , security and comfortable journey of the 
passengers are the aims of Railways  in train operation. To meet this 
objective , the following facilities have been provided in almost all -
important stations .  
a) Continuous  announcement through public address system  
b) Electronic display board  
b) IVRS system for giving on line information about availab ility of 
Accommodation, arrival & departure of trains.  Call centers and 
integrated  IVRS for giving all types of passenger Information . 
VIII) Voice Recorder: - Train operation information between controllers at 
Divisional he adquarters and way stations  are normally passed through 
control circuits. All such conversations between section controller and 
station Master are recorded at control office, which can be used for train 
management  at any  time of investigation in case of any accident/mishap.  
IX) Rail Net: - Railway  has its own data network  for management  purpose 
called “RAILNET”. This is widely used for file transfer, e -mail and public 
informa tion. This network spreads through entire Railway system 
connecting divisional headquarters, Zonal headquarters, workshops  and 
hospitals.  
X) Disaster Management :- Telecom plays a vital role in Disaster 
Management. To meet  the requirement of Disaster Management a 
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
418 
For internal use of IA&AD  universal number is provided at all control offices which can be accessed 
from any part of India  duly pre fixing the city code. There are Accident 
Relief Trains and Medical  Relief Vans  placed at strategic  locations. All 
such ARTs and MRVs are equipped with mobile INMARSAT 
telephones, walkie -talkie sets and public address system. Video 
conferencing equipment  and wireless satellite based modems are also 
being added.  
XI) Video conferencing: - Video conferencing facilities are available in 
divisional headquarters, zonal headquarters and Railway  board, for 
administrative purpose.  
XII) BSNL Telephone: - BSNL telephones have been provided at all Railway  
stations  for giving train information to the public.  
XIII) Computerization and Networking: - The following activities of Production  
Control Organisation have been computerized .  
a) Work Order releasing  
b) Product ion control Documents.  
c) Estimated Annual Requirements for Stock  Items.  
d) Revision of manufacturing items  
e) Bill of Materials  for all manufacturing items.  
f) Inspection  details – inspection of i nward items.  
g) Vendor evaluation  
h) Demand and Dispatch position details etc.  
In addition of above activities of S&T  department, the following 
items/activities may also be seen/ reviewed during inspection of this 
department: - 
I) Installation, perform ance and maintenance of CCTV camera  
II) Installation, performance  and maintenance of touch screen working at 
stations . 
III) Installation, performance  and maintenance of coach guidance Boar d 
at stations . 
IV) Installation, working performance  and maintenance of Excel counter.  
V)  Maintenance  of all equipment  is carried out through the maintenance 
set up of staff at Divisions, Way  stations  and in specialized 
laboratories. However, since the telecom & signal technology is 
changing fast, Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC ) through reputed 
firms wherever necessary is being opted. Maintenance is carried out 
as per the schedule drawn up in Telecom & signal Manual .  
VI) Review of contracts awarded for PRS , FOIS, TMS , vehicles hired etc 
by S&T  department.  
VII) Review of AMC  for SSI, IPS, Data logger, MSDAC, SS DAC, AFTC 
etc. 
Chapter 11  – Signal & Telecommunication  Department  
 
419 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) Training of telecomminication staff for new functions  i.e. UTS ,FOIS 
and OFC etc  
IX) Attendance Register  and Casual Leave Account.  
X) Tools and Plants Register . 
XI) Stationery Register . 
XII) Estimates and completion reports.  
XIII) Review of contracts, agreements and work orders.  
XIV)  Imprest Account.  
XV) Review of imprest cash . 
XVI)  Question of General  Policy.  
XVII)  Review of telephone trunk call bills  received f rom P&T Department.  
XVIII)  Review of rent of the telephone wires payable to P&T Department.  
XIX)  Review of Narrative Reports.  
XX) Review of Major  Works  sent to Railway  Board  and General  Manager . 
XXI)  Scrutiny of system of delegation of powers.  
XXII)  Review of last Inspection  Reports issued by Audit  and Accounts . 
XXIII)  Advice Notes and Issue Notes.  
XXIV)  Stores -Purchase bills . 
XXV)  Check of T.A. bills  of Officials.  
XXVI)  Review of Important cases.  
XXVII)  Register  of card passes Movement register.  
XXVIII)  Monthly  returns of stores of subordinates.  
XXIX)  Clothing and uniform Account.  
XXX)  Progress report of works.  
XXXI)  Sanctione d strength.  
XXXII)  Review of rent rolls and quarter register.  
XXXIII)  Credit Notes and R.M.C. Notes.  
XXXIV)  Review of Measurement Books  and Register  of Measurement Books 
closed and current.  
XXXV)  Stores  ledgers.  
XXXVI)  Stores  bills. 
XXXVII)  Provision of trollies and engagement of staff thereof.  
XXXVIII)  Handling over notes.  
XXXIX)  Review of any other important cases noticed during inspection.  
 
******************  
  
 Railway Audit Manual  
 
420 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
421 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 12  - AUDIT OF MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
Mechanical  Department  of Indian  Railways  is responsible for management  of – 
Train  operations  by ensuring Motive  Power  availability, Rolling  Stock  
Management  and Traffic  restoration in case of derailment, accidents  etc. in 
association with other Departments . 
Production  Units  engaged in production  of Diesel  and Electric  Locomotives , 
Coaches , Wheel  sets, etc.  
Workshops  to ensure repairs  and periodical  maintenance  of Rolling  Stock  and 
related mechanical components . 
1.1 Functions of Mechanical  Department  
I) Designing and manufacturing of Rolling  Stock , 
II) Deployment  and maintenance  of Rolling  Stock , 
III) Disaster  Management . 
Mechanical  Department  is responsible for maintenance  of Rolling  Stock  viz. 
Passenger  coaches , Wagons , DMUs and Cranes  etc. Besides, it maintains a large 
number of Machinery  &Plant  (M & P ) in workshops , sheds  and other work  
centers. Mechanical Department works  as a nodal Department for consolidation 
of requirement of Machinery & Plant of various Departments  and processes for 
approval  and its procurement  under M & P  Programme  every year. The 
Department also formulates plans  for procurement  of Rolling Stock  and ensures 
safety  and reliability of stock  in train operations . 
Rolling  Stock  Programme  Works   
Annual requirement of rolling stock is derived as a follow up of the 
Five Year  Plans. The planning  process for the Five Year Plans as given 
in Chapter VIII of the  Indian Railway  Administration and Finance  
"Operational and Financial  Planning” is as under:  
a. Appointment  of Steering  Groups  consisting  of representatives  of 
various  economic Ministries well in  advance  of the  
commencement of  Five  Year Plan  for covering  various  facets  of 
the plan.  
b. Setting up of Working Groups by each Ministry . The Ministry  of 
Railways  is generally  the convener  of the Working  Groups  on— 
i. Freight  traffic  projections:  
ii. Passenger  traffic  projections;  and 
iii. Formulation  of Railway  Development  Programs.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
422 
For internal use of IA&AD  c. The Working  Groups  after  taking  into consideration  the total 
freight  and passenger traffic  likely to be  carried in plan period on 
the basis of sectoral  analysis  fix the traffic  targets  and then examine  
it  to  determine  the requirement  of the rolling  stock  in respect  of 
wagons,  carriages  and locomotives.  
d. The draft  plan thus prepared  is taken  up for detailed  discussion  
and adjustment made  depending upon the fina ncial  resources  
available.  The final plan thus emerged is subject to periodical  
reviews based on the growth  of expected traffic . This review is 
conducted jointly between the economic  Ministries  and 
shortfalls  and fluctuations  are analyzed  and necessary  alterations  
made  in the plan.  
e. The Five Year  Plan is implemented through an action oriented 
annual plan  prepared  in consultation  with  Finance  ministry. (Se e 
para  1004 of Indian Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code).  
Itemized  Rolling  Stock  Program  (IRSP ) 
The itemized  Rolling  Stock  Programme   should  be  prepared  by  the  
zonal  Railways  and PUs for (a) Works  already  sanctioned  by the Board  
(Programmed  Deliveries)  with any changes  in numbers  or unit rates  and 
(b) for  New  Works (New  Acquisitions)  proposed  on the  premise  that 
the  proposals  are not global  in nature  and pertain  to the specific  local  
requirement  of the particular  zone.  
IRSP  is submitted on a similar pattern as the Works  Programme , 
separately for  Programmed Deliveries and new Acquisitions. The  
IRSP proposals  are consolidated and  examined by various 
directorates, moderated or modified. These are then sent for  finance 
concurrence and approval of the C.A. The approved proposals are 
returned to  PU Directorate  for compilation  and data entry  for the Pink  
Book .(See para  1018 of Indian Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code).  
2. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP OF MECHANICAL 
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT  
2.1 At Railway  Board  
The Mechanical  Engineering  Department  at Railway  Board  level is headed by the 
Member  (Rolling  Stock ) and assisted by Additional  Members  (Mechanical 
Engineering), Additional Member (Production  Units ), Executive  Directors , 
Directors and their subordinate  Officers.  
 
   
 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
423 
For internal use of IA&AD   

Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
424 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.2 Zonal  Headquarters  Level  
The Principal  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  (PCME ) is the Principal Head of the 
Mechanical Department  reporting directly to the General  Manager  and Member - 
Traction and Rolling  Stock  through PCDO /MCDO . He is assisted by various 
Heads of the Departments  viz. Chief Workshop  Engineer  (CWE ), Chief Motive  
Power  Engineer (CMPE ), Chief Rolling Stock  Engineer  /Coaching  (CRSE/C), 
Chief Rolling Stock Engineer/ Freight  & Operation (CRSE/ F&O) Chief 
Mechanical Engineer/ Planning  (CME /P). These HODs are assisted by Deputy  
Chief Mechanical Engineers  (Dy. CMEs), EMEs/Senior  Mechanical Engineers 
& Assistant  Mechanical Engineers at Zonal  Headquarters . 
2.3 Divisional  Level  
Sr. Divisional  Mechanical  Engineer  /Carriage  &Wagon , is the nodal officer for 
all mechanical activities in Division . He is assisted by Divisional Mechanical 
Engineer/ (DME )/ Assistant  Divisional Mechanical Engin eer (ADME ) and 
Coaching  Depots Officers. Coaching Depots  are headed by Sr. Coaching Depot  
Officer (Sr.  CDO )/ Coaching Depot Officer (CDO) depending upon the size of 
the Depot (Holding of Trains with p rimary and Secondary maintenance  in a 
particular Coaching Depot) assisted by Assistant Divisional Mechanical Engineer  
(ADME)/ Senior  Sectional  Engineer  (SSEs ) while Wagon depots  are headed by 
Divisional Mechanical Engineers  (DMEs}/ Assistant Divisional Mechanical 
Engineers ( ADMEs) who are under administrative control  of Divisional Railway  
Manager  (DRM ) of Division . 
The Assistant  Mechanical  Engineers  are in charge of duties at sub Divisional  level 
duly assisted by Sr. Section  Engineer  /C&W (SSE /C&W), SSE (Diesel ), 
SSE/ART  & SSE /Sick  line etc. in charge of the Sections at field level.  
2.4 Workshops  Level  
The Workshop  is headed by Chief  Worksh op Manager  (CWM ). All the officers 
posted in the Workshop are under his/ her direct  administrative control . These 
include the Dy. Chief Mechanical  Engi neers  (Dy. CMEs), Works  Managers  
(WMs), Assistant  Works Managers  (AWMs) and SSEs  of Mechanical 
Department , Dy. CEEs, AEEs  and SSEs of Electrical  Department, SPO / APO  of 
Personnel  Department, Chemist and Metallurgist , SSE  /Budget , SSE/ RSP, SSE/ 
Progress , SSE/ M& P, SSE /Safety , Dy. FA & CAO  or Sr. AFA /AFA  of Accounts  
Department and Dy. CMM / AMM of Stores  Department, Security  Officer of 
appropriate  level from the Security Department . 
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1 Railway  Board  level  
Member  (Traction and Rolling  Stock ) is over all in -charge of Mechanical  
Department . He is assisted by Additional  Member /Mechanical Engineering  and 
Additional Member /Production  Units . Apart from his regular duties, 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
425 
For internal use of IA&AD  EMU /MEMU Train  sets, Electrical  maintenance  of all coaching  Stock has been 
added to his/her list of duties and Diesel  Locos , related sheds , Crew  and Running  
rooms and Workshops  (exclusively for Locos) Fuel  Management  have been 
deleted from his regular duty  list as per Railway  Board  Office  Order No 58  of 
2016 issued vide letter No . 2016/O&M/8/1 dated 03/08/2016 . Further, 
administrative control  of Rail  Coach  Factory , Kanchrapara Project  has also been 
assigned to him as per  Railway Board  Office Order No. 4 of 2018  issued vide 
Railway Board Letter No. 2016/O&M/8/1 dated 05/01/2018.  
Additional  Mem ber/ Mechanical  Engineering  is responsible for open line  
working, inter -railway  co-ordination  and co -ordination  with Additional Mem ber 
/Traffic  for Rolling  Stock  use. He/ She is assisted by EDMEs/DMEs.  
Additional  Member / Production  Unit / (AM/PU) assisted by EDMEs/ DMEs, is 
responsible for proper functioning of Workshops , Production Units  and 
Mechanical  wing of RDSO  & COFMOW . He/ She also co -ordinates with other 
Directorates  for Rolling  Stock  manufacture and repairs . 
Activities  of Mechanical  Department  dealt with in various Sections at the 
Railway  Board  are as under: - 
Sr. 
No. Name of the 
Section  Activities  dealt with by the Section  
1. Coaching  Section    Coach  Building Programme  in Railway  Workshops / 
Production  Units  (PUs ). 
 Fixation  of authorized stock  – All types of Coaches . 
 Replacement requirements, dis tribution  allotment and 
readjustment in the authorized holdings of coaching  stock . 
 Layout and Design  of all passenger  carrying coaching  
vehicles and Conde mnation  of coaching  stock . 
 Provision  of amenities  in coaches . 
 Sanction  to estimates  for coaches . 
 Prog ramming the construction  of special  coaching  stock  like 
Mail  Vans, Military Vehicles, Refrigerated  Vans, and 
Reserved Vehicles etc. for other Government  Departments . 
 Design  safety  aspects of all coaching  vehicles including AC 
& Non -AC PCVs, OCVs, EMUs, DMUs and MEMUs.  
 Coach  maintenance  infrastructure , planning . 
2. Mechanical  (N) 
Section   Requirement and distribution  of Wagons . 
 Sale of wagons  from line  / Condemnation  of wagons . 
 Sanction  of estimates  and completion  reports  pertaining to 
wagons  ordered on ‘Private  building ’ only.  
 Wagon  designs . 
 Inter Railway  Transfer  of wagons . 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
426 
For internal use of IA&AD  Sr. 
No. Name of the 
Section  Activities  dealt with by the Section  
 Amendments  and modification  to IRCA  Conference Rules , 
Part III pertaining to wagons . 
 Maximum permissible speeds for Rolling  Stock  (wagons ). 
 Issues  related to overloading of wagons . 
 Policy  regarding maintenance  and repairs  of wagons . 
 Patents  of new  wagon  designs  and components . 
3. Fuel Branch   All policy  matters related to procurement  of High  Speed  
Diesel  oil, lubricants  for use in diesel locomotives  and for 
train operation  purposes on Indian  Railways .  
 Monitoring  of the consumption  of high  speed  diesel oil, 
lubricants .  
 All policy  matters related to dispensation of High  Speed  
Diesel  oil and lubricants  through Railway  diesel 
installations.  
 Monitoring  of the quality  of High  Speed  Diesel  oil and 
lubricants  supplied to Railways .  
 Monitoring  of implementation  of fuel economy  measures  on 
Indian  Railways .  
 Energy  conservation on Railways . 
 Budget  for fuel consumed on Railways . 
 Amendmen ts and modifications  to wagon  Maintenance  
Manual . 
4. Mechanical  
(Safety )  Accidents due to mechanical defects  on all  Zonal  Railways .  
 Annual  Safety  reviews of Indian  Railways .  
 All Safety  matters concerning Mechanical  Directorate .  
 CRS  recommendations . 
5, Mechanical  
(Drawing )  Maintenance  of charts  and graphs concerning operations , 
Workshop  activities & Mechanical  planning .  
 Preparation  of tracings and maps .  
 Maintenance  of Index  section  of all Indian  Railways .  
 Type wise ownership of wagons . 
6. Mechanical  
(M&P )  Annual  Machinery  and Plant  Programme  of all Railways  /  
 All matters pertaining to out -of-turn sanction for M&P , 
revised cost  estimates  etc.  
 Review of utilization of M&P  in Railway  Workshops .  
 Liaison  with COFMOW  on all matters.  
 Inventory  and age of M&P  on Railways .  
 External Aid/Loans for M&P .  
 Rail cranes on Railways , planning  and provision in RSP.  
 Accident  Relief  Trains on Railways .  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
427 
For internal use of IA&AD  Sr. 
No. Name of the 
Section  Activities  dealt with by the Section  
 Coordination  on behalf of Mechanical  Directorate  for 
Wheel  Mainten ance Hub.  
7. Mechanical  (W)   Works  Programme : Workshops  and Diesel  locomotives  
sheds , Sick  lines and De pots of all Railways  and the 
Production  Units  viz. Chittranjan  Locomotive  Works 
(CLW ), Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW ), Integral C oach  
Factory  (ICF ), Rail  Wheel  Factory (RWF ), Rail Coach 
Factory (RCF ), and Diesel Loco  Modernization  Works 
(DMW ) including machinery and Plant  integrated  in works  
programme .  
 Rationalization  of workshop capacity.  
 Incentive  Scheme  in Railway  Workshops  (Mechanical , 
Electrical , Civil  Engineering  and S&T  Workshops), Work  
Study in Railway Workshops.  
 Wagon  Produc tion in various Units .  
3.2 Zonal  Headquarters  Level  
Principal  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  (PCME ) is over all in -charge of Mechanical 
Department . He/ She reports  to the General  Manager  and Member  /Rolling  Stock  
through PCDO / MCDO . The roles and responsibilities of HODs of Mechanical 
Department are as under : - 
Heads of 
Department  (HOD)  Roles and responsibilities  
Chief  Workshop  
Engineer  (CWE )  Administration  of all Workshops  on the Zonal  Railway . 
 Oversee availability of important items and coordination  with 
Stores  Department .  
 Workshop  budget  & economy .  
 Maintenance  of drawings  and specifications  of Rolling  Stock  
items.  
Chief Rolling  Stock  
Engineer  (CRSE )   Proper  maintenance  of carriage fleet on the open line .  
 Coordination  with CWE / Workshops  for availability of workshop 
manufactured items/ sub -assemblies . 
 Oversee stock  position of vital items and stores  coordination . 
 Monitor  Passenger  complaints  about amenity fittings . 
Chief  Mechanical  
Engineer -Planning  
(CME  /Planning)   Coordin ation  of M&P  sanction and procurement  of M&P for all 
Departments . 
 Specification of Machinery  & Plants  and Coordination  with 
COFMOW /COS  for procurement , installation, commissioning , 
prove out warranty  of machines  and coordinate training  of 
personnel for new  machines   
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
428 
For internal use of IA&AD  Heads of 
Department  (HOD)  Roles and responsibilities  
 Planning  of Works  Program of Mechanical  Department   
Chief  Rolling  Stock  
Engineering - 
(Freigh t& Operations  
(CRSE (F&O))   Proper  utilization of locos on line .  
 Staff  training  and training  for conversion  from Diesel  to Electric  
loco operation .  
 Economic  use of fuel.  
 Proper  maintenance  of wagon  fleet on open line . 
 Coordination  with CWE  regarding availability of workshop 
manufactured items/ sub -assemblies .  
Chief  Motive  Power  
Engineer  Diesel  
(CMPE  (D)).   Proper  maintenance  of Diesel  locomotives .  
 Planning  maintenance  facilities for Diesel  locos.   
 Liaison  with RDSO , DLW , CLW , DMW .  
 Oversee stock  of unit  exchange spares , particularly imported  
spares.  
 Monitor outage of Diesel  locomotives   
3.3 Divisional  Level  
Sr. Divisional  Mechanical  Engineer  /Carriage  &Wagon , is the nodal officer for 
all mechanical activities in Division . He/ She is assisted by Divisional Mechanical 
Engineer/ (DME )/ Assistant  Divisional Mechanical Engineer (ADME ) and 
Coaching  Depots  Officers. Duties and responsibili ties of Sr. DME/ C& W are as 
under: - 
I) Budget  Proposals for Mechanical  Department  (Capital  & Revenue ), 
II) Ensuring availability of spares  and uninterrupted supp lies of fuels for 
locomotives  and watering in coaches , 
III) Maintenance  of carriages , wagons  and other items of Rolling  Stock , 
keeping the ine ffective stock  to the bare minimum,  
IV) Safety  examinations and unscheduled attention as necessary arising on 
line and at satellite sheds  and outstation depots , 
V) Timely withdrawal  of Rolling  stock  from traffic  and dispatching to 
nominated Workshops  for Periodical  Overhaul  and Mid  life rehabilitation  
to MLR shops , 
VI) Planning  facilities for induction of additional  assets  or new  trains , 
VII) To ensure that punctuality  of trains  remains unaffected by defects  in the 
Rolling  Stock  or Locos , 
VIII) Linen  Management , 
IX) Maintenance  of Weighbridges , 
X) Accid ent Relief  Train  (ART ) and Accident Relief Medical  Equipment  
Van (ARME ) for dealing with Relief and Rescue  operations  under Disaster  
Management , 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
429 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Liaison  with other departments  to meet with the work  requirements in 
areas related to Mechanical  Department , 
XII) Maintenance  of crew booking  points,  
XIII) Ensuring effective manpower  planning , 
XIV)  Ensuring training  of staff . 
XV) Ensure provision of passenger  amenities  in trains  including, proper 
cleaning (On Board  House  Keeping Service  (OBHS )), pest control , 
watering etc.  
3.4 Workshop  Level (Car riages , Wagons  & Locos ) 
Workshop  is headed by Chief  Workshop Manager  /Workshop Manager / Assistant  
Workshops  Manager depending upon the size (activities and holding of Rolling  
Stock ) of the workshop assisted by Jr. Administrative  Grade  (Dy. Level officer)/ 
Sr. Scale  /Jr. Scale Officer of other Departments  like Electrical , Stores , Accounts , 
etc. These officers work  under administrative control  of Chief Workshop 
Manager /Workshop Manager .  
Various departments  in Workshops  and their roles and responsibilities are as 
under  
Departments  Roles and responsibilities  
Production  Control  
Organization - Responsible for evaluation , work  planning , material  
arrangement, work  study and implementation  of incentive  
scheme.  
Inspection   Responsible for quality  control  of workshop activities.  
Repairs   Responsible for Rolling  Stock /sub assembly repairs .  
Manufacture   Responsible for manufacturing of components /sub- assemblies, 
mostly on stores  work  orders.  
M&P   Responsible for planning , procu rement , commissioning  and 
upkeep  of machinery and plant.  
Establishment  Responsible for payment of wages , promotion  and placement of 
staff and other personnel matters.  
Electrical   Responsible for upkeep  of electrical installations, power  supply  
etc.  
Stores  Depot   Responsible for availabili ty of material  as per indent  placed by 
the User Department , inventory  control , Scrap  disposal  
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
Level  Main activity  Allied / Sub activity  
Railway  Board   Evolving Specifications and 
designs  of the Locos  and 
Rolling  Stock  and choosing 
the most economical option 
on a ‘life cycle  basis’   All Policy  Matters relate d to 
maintenance  and operation  
of Rolling  Stock , 
Procurement  of fuel and all 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
430 
For internal use of IA&AD  Level  Main activity  Allied / Sub activity  
 Stipulating philosophy of 
Manufacture  and 
maintenance  of various areas 
of Rolling  Stock  viz. 
Traction , coaching  including 
EMU , freight , Workshops  
and development  functions   
 Monitoring  the performance  
of Railway   other subjects related to 
Mechanical  Directorate .   
 Authorisation of Rolling  
Stock . 
 Designs  of Rolling  Stock . 
 Sanctions  to estimates  of 
Rolling  Stock . 
 Rolling  Stock  Programme . 
 Works  Programme  (PH -42) 
& Machinery  & Plant  
Programme of Railways  
(PH-41). 
 Liaison  with other 
depart ments  viz. 
COFMOW , RDSO , Stores  
directorate  etc. 
 Monitoring  Performance  of 
repairs  and maintenance  of 
Rolling  Stock , consumption  
of fuel etc.  
 All safety  matters relating to 
Mechanical  Directorate .  
 CRS  recommendations . 
 Disaster  Management . 
 Environmental  Health  
Management . 
 Compilation  of Annual  
works  programme  proposals.  
 Manpower  management . 
 Crew  management . 
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock . 
 Replies to Parliamentary  
questions  related to 
Mechanical  department.  
Zonal  Railways   Repairs  and Maintenance  
of Rolling  Stock  
 Fuel management   
 Crew  management  
 Stores  management   
 Disaster  management    Rolling  Stock  Programme . 
 Machinery  & Plant  
Programme  (PH 41) and 
Works Programme (PH -42) 
& Revenue  grants.  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
431 
For internal use of IA&AD  Level  Main activity  Allied / Sub activity  
 Environmental  Health  
Management  
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock .  Requirement of assessment  
of HSD  Oil. 
 Repairs  and maintenance  of 
Rolling  Stock  viz. 
Coach ing, Wagons , Locos , 
etc. 
 Environmental  
Management .   
 Contract  Management . 
 Stores  Management . 
 Manpow er Management . 
 Accident  Relief  Train  
(ART ) /Accident Relief 
Medical  Equipment  Van 
(ARME ) /crane.  
 Obtaining CRS  sanctions .  
 Maintenance  of 
Weighbridge.  
 Disaster  management . 
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock . 
 Passenger  amenities . 
 Modernisation of coaching  
depots  and Loco  Sheds .  
Divisions   Repairs  and Maintenance  
of Rolling  Stock 
 Fuel management   
 Crew  management   
 Stores  management   
 Disaster  management   
 Environmental  Health  
Management  
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock .  Machinery  & Plant  
Programme . (PH 41) and 
Works  Progra mme (PH -42) 
& Revenue  grants.  
 Estimation / Procurement  
and utilisation of fuel.  
 Estimation  /Procurement  / 
Distribution  and utilization 
of HS D oil at Divisions . 
 Repairs  and maintenance  of 
Rolling  Stock  viz. 
Coaching , Wagons , Locos  
at maintenance  depots  and 
loco sheds . (Intermediate  
Over  Hauling  (IOH )/ 
Routine  Over Hauling 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
432 
For internal use of IA&AD  Level  Main activity  Allied / Sub activity  
(ROH ) and day to day 
maintenance )  
 Protection  and 
improvement of 
environment.  
 Contract  Management . 
 Store Management .  
 Manpower  Management .  
 Accident  Relief  Train  
(ART ) /Accident Relief 
Medical  Equipment  Van 
(ARME )/ Cranes .  
 Obtaining CRS  sanctions  
of Rolling  Stock . 
 Maintenance  of Electronic  
-in motion - Weighbridges . 
 Attending passenger  
complaints .  
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock .  
 Billing  for repairs  and 
maintenance  of Rolling  
Stock  of outside party. 
Disaster  Management  
Worksho ps   Intermediate  Overhauling  
(IOH ) /Periodical  Over  
hauling (POH ) 
 Midlife  rehabilitation  of 
Rolling  Stock  
 Stores  Management   
 Disaster  management   
 Environmental  Health  
Management  
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock .  Periodical  Over  Hauling  
(POH ) of 
Coaches /Wagons /Locos . 
 POH  of other vehicles 
Postal vans, saloons  etc. 
 POH  of private  /jointly 
owned  wagons . 
 Midlife  rehabilitation  of 
coaches / Wagons  and other 
Rolling  Stock . 
 Work  done for outsiders 
and other Government  and 
semi Government bodies.  
 Environmental  Health  
Management . 
 Contract Management . 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
433 
For internal use of IA&AD  Level  Main activity  Allied / Sub activity  
 Machinery  & Plant  
Programme  (PH 41) and 
Works  Programme (PH -
42) 
 Budget  for revenue 
expenditure . 
 Store m anagement .  
 Manpower  Management .  
 Condemnation  of Rolling  
Stock . 
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS  
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the Mechanical  
Department :  
I) Current  Budget  & Demands  for Grant ,  
II) Finance  & Ap propriation  Accounts ,  
III) Trend of expenditure  and /or receipts ,  
IV) Number of Tender  cases/ Contract  cases/ other misc. cases,  
V) When last Audited  viz. audited  last one year/ three year/ five year/ more 
than five years,  
VI) Past audit  coverage,  
VII) Past Audit  findings/ Inspection  Reports ,  
VIII) Audit  perception ba sed on various activities, Arrears, progress of works  
and other relevant factors,  
IX) Media reports  and visibility of topics,  Publications, Complaints  etc.  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN MECHANICAL DEPARTME NT 
The Indian  Railways  embarked on a speed  work  of switching over to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and have implemented various IT Applications  in the 
last few years .  Presently, following IT applications  are being used by the 
Mechanical  Department . Detailed  information may be downloaded/ extracted 
from these a pplications  for exercising Audit  checks , as stated against each items 
below.  
Name of IT  
application  Remarks  
Coaching  Maintenance  
Manageme nt System  
(CMMS ) CMMS  (Coaching  Maintenance  Management  System ) is 
coaching  depot  maintenance  module  software  developed by 
CRIS . It is used all over Indian  railways.  The CMM  or Coach  
Maintenance Management module has been developed to 
facilitat e and record details of maintenance  of coaches  and 
management  of spare parts inventory . It is fully integrated  with 
the operations  modules  for generating alerts, interchange of 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
434 
For internal use of IA&AD  Name of IT  
application  Remarks  
information, request for placement of Rolling  Stock  for repairs , 
delivery and acknowledgement  of certification  of coaches  for 
service , etc.  
Integrated  Coaching  
Management  Systems  
(ICMS ) It is used for main aspect of coaching  operations  like running  of 
coaching  trains  (punctuality ), Coaching  Stock  management  and 
Time tabling  etc.  
Coach  Mitra   The Coach  Mitra  App is a single -window system  developed to 
enable passengers  to flag  issues relating to cleanlin ess, provision 
of water , linen  quality  and electrical fittings  on trains . Besides 
the mobile app, passengers can also lodge complaints  throug h 
SMS  to designated numbers.  
Workshop  Information  
Management  System  
(WISE ) Coaching  workshops  deal with the Rolling  Stock  arriving in the 
workshop for different type of overhauling  and outturn . Data  in 
this regard and other associated activity such as inspection  
Report  sheet, berthing position, Stock indent  and material  
Receipt  interface  has been developed for entering the master 
data. CWM  dashboard is very interactive and live data is shown . 
Initially this Application  was running  in five Workshops : Lower 
Parel (WR), Charbagh (NR), Raipur (SECR), Lallaguda (SCR) 
and Liluah (ER).  
The salient features  of IT  applications  viz. Coaching  Maintenance  Management  
System  (CMMS ) and Integrated  Coaching Management Systems  (ICMS ) are 
detailed in Annexure -I. 
In addition to the above , other IT  applications  viz. IRPSM  (Indian  Railways  
Projects  Sanctions  & Man agement ), IPAS  (Integrated  Payroll  & Accounting 
System ), IREPS  (Indian Railway  E-Procurement  System) are also used by the 
Mechanical  Department  for various purposes. Details in respect of checks  to be 
applied in these IT applications  mentioned in the Chapter on Audit  of Engineering  
Department are applicable to audit  of Mechanical department also . 
7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS - CHECK LIST  
7.1 Audit  of Sanctions  
Sanctions  dealt with by the Mechanical  Departm ent relate mainly to additions and 
alterations t o Rolling  Stock  holding of the Railways  and works  undertaken on 
behalf of other government department/ ministries and private  parties. 
Instructions  with regard to audit  of sanctions  pertaining to Establishment  Audit  
and Expenditure  Audit will apply mutatis mu tandis  to the sanctions  received. 
Sanctions to be considered for Audit are as under: - 
I) Financial  sanctions  accorded by the Government  of India , ministry of 
Railways  (Railway  Board ) or the General  Manager , 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
435 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) The allocation  of estimates  sanctioned  by the  same authorities , 
III) General  Orders issued by the General Manager  under the power  delegated 
to him,  
IV) The detailed accounts  of the Railways  to see that these have been correctly 
prepared and are in proper form, no alteration in the form of the accounts  
or in classification  is made without the approval  of competent  authority , 
V) All Sanctions  should be fully audited  with reference to cannons of 
financial  propriety  and the schedule  of powers . 
7.1.1 Other Sanctions  
Other sa nctions  include ex -gratia payments to contractors , payment of taxes  to 
municipalities or local  bodies etc. write off  of losses, payments arising out of 
arbitration  award . Ordinarily sanctions  accorded by a competent  authority  remain 
valid for a specified period for which they are accorded. It is, however, essential 
to review such sanction s periodically to see that the conditions attached thereto 
are duly fulfilled before expenditure  incurred there under is finally admitted  in 
audit .  
Following checks  may be exercised during Audit  of sanctions   
I) That all sanctions  are justified duly satisfying the Standards  (Canons) of 
financial  propriety  (Para 116 of F -I). 
II) The sanctioning authority  is competent  to grant  the sanctions  as per the 
Schedu le of Powers  
III) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations are endorsed 
by the Finance  Department , wherever necessary.  
IV) Financial  sancti ons are issued under the signature  of the officers 
concerned in ink  and not over cyclostyled  signatures  
7.2 Audit  of Estimates  
The audit  of estimates  sanctioned  during a particular month  should be completed 
by the end of the following month .  The selection of estimates  for audit should be 
made by th e Branch  officer of the section  from the Register  of estimates  
maintained in the Accounts  Office  and particulars of the selected estimates  should 
be entered in a separate register  in the Audit  Office. The instructions  relating to 
audit of estimates  contained in the Chapter for Works  Audit apply mutatis 
mutandis  to audit of workshop estimates .  Chapters 7  and Chapter 10  of Indian  
Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code  may also be  referred to in this regard.  
The authorised Rolling  Stock  of each kind for each Railway  is fixed  by the 
Railway Board  and any addition to or reduction from this number requires its 
sanction.  If any stock  is condemned  or otherwise reduced without being replaced 
immediately its original cost  should be written back from capital  to Depreciation  
Reserve  Fund  in the same year.  
It is unnecessary to insist on prior approval  of the Railway  Board  in cases of 
Rolling  Stock  estimates  included in the budget  estimates  at a stage when the Pink 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
436 
For internal use of IA&AD  Book  (i.e., the sanctioned  budget estimates ) has not been received. Such estimates  
may be passed provisionally on the basis of the information given in the budget 
estimates  and finally on receipt  of the Pink Book . 
7.2.1 Audit  of estimates  for Postal  Vans  
(Para 723 -725 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
The instructions  laid down in para 723-725 of Rolling  Stock  Code  apply to audit  
of incidence  of cost  related to Postal  Vans of Post  and Telegraph  Department . 
The minimum standards  for equipment  in the Postal  portion of coaching  stock  
should be decided by the Railway  Board  in consultation with the Postal 
Department  and should be advised to the Zonal  Railways  and Workshops . The 
vehicles are of two types.   
I) The vehicles owned  by Railwa ys. 
II) The vehicles owned  by the Postal  Department .   
Points to be seen by Audit :- 
I) For vehicles owned  by Postal  Department , whether POH  and maintenance  
charges  are recovered from Postal Department  
II) For vehicles owned  by Railways , whether Interest and Depreciation  
charges  have been paid by the Postal  Department  
III) The Capital  cost of the new  vehicles built for the exclusive use of the 
Postal  Department , on their requisi tion, shall be borne by that department. 
The Capital cost  of vehicles which are also used by the Railways  shall be 
borne by Railways. In the latter case, the Postal Department shall pay  
interest  and depreciation  charges . 
IV) In case of conversion  of existing vehicle  fully or partially and in case of 
surrender of vehicle  by Postal  Department , cost  of conversion  for use by 
Postal Department or cost  of conversion  for use by general public , the cost  
including cost  of transportation is to be borne by Postal department  
7.2.2.  Audit  of estimates  for Saloon  carriages  and other vehicles reserved for the 
exclusive use of Departments  / Ministries of GOI and St ate Governments  
(Para 726-729 of Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
The instructions  laid down in para 726 -729 of Rolling  Stock  Code  apply to audit  
of incidence  of costs related to Saloon  carriages  and other  vehicles reserved for 
the exclusive use of Departments / Ministries of Government  of India  and State  
Governments.  
Points to be seen by Audit  
I) Ensure prior sanction of competent  authority  of concerned department is 
obtained for provision of vehicle .  
II) Ensure design  of vehicle  is as per standards  prescribed  by RDSO  and has 
the approval  of Railway  Board . 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
437 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) The total cost  of construction  of the vehicles will be borne on the books  
of the Railways . 
IV) Department  should pay  annual  charges  which includes Interest, 
Depreciation  charges , Repair and Maintenance  charges . 
V) Cost of any alteration and addition to the body is borne by the using 
department.  
VI) Cost of replacement  of vehicle  is borne by Railways .  
VII) In case a new  vehicle  has been buil t in replacement  of existing one, 
Interest, Depreciation  and Repairs  and Maintenance  charges  shall be paid 
annually by user Department . 
VIII) A Profor ma Capital  and Revenue  Account  of all such vehicles should be 
kept.  
7.3 Completion  Reports  
The instructions  laid down in the c hapter on Works  Audit  (See para 1701 -1714 -
E) and paragraphs  752 and 781-786 of Rolling  Stock  Code  apply to completion  
reports  of works  done in the worksh ops. 
Points to be seen by Audit   
I) To see that there is no delay in booking  of charges  under work  orders and 
issue  of completion  advice.  
II) To see tha t effective measures  are taken to ensure that the procedure for 
chasing delays and irregularities  is effective. ( 752 of Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
III) To see that the Completion  Report  is prepared in prescribed  proforma 
(Form 781 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) and the figures of actual expenditure  
as well as those of estimated amount is shown in the same details in which  
the estimate  has been prepared and sanctioned , 
IV) To see that before preparing the Completion  Report  (i) all charges  under 
different subheads of estimate  have been correctly booked, (ii) the 
difference in value, if any has been accounted within the same financial  
year (duly obtaining the certificate  to that effect from the respective 
supplier) and (iii) credit  for released material  has been adjusted.  
V) To see that the Completion  Report  is sanctioned  by the competent  
authority .  
VI) To see that in case of exce ss over sanctioned  estimate  the same is 
sanctioned  by the authority  competent  to sanction the excess. (Para  783 
of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
VII) To see that a note is recorded in the Works  Register  under the work  
concerned t o the effect that ‘Work  completed and completion  report 
prepared and submitted to .................. on ............ for sanction."  
VIII) To see that all the completion  reports  are entered in th e Completion  Report  
Register  with complete details ( 783-785 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
438 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) To see that procedures as laid  down in para 786  of Rolling  Stock  Code  are 
followed in cases of charges  and credits  reported on completed Works  
necessitating the revision  of Completion  Reports . 
7.4 Stores  Bills  and Contractors Bills  
The instructions  contained in paragraphs  in chapter on Stores  Audit  and Works  
Audit should also be applied to audit  of Stores  bills and Contractors bills  
respectively.  
7.5 Bonus  and Piece Work  Bills  
The whole field may be divided into suitable units  keeping in view the extent of 
check prescribed  and one unit  selected each month .  The units may be so drawn 
as to contain a reasonable number of direct  workers , indirect  workers  and 
supervisors .  In addition to the monthly  check, a general review of the records 
maintained in the incentive  branch of the Accounts  Office  should be undertaken 
yearly, to examine the syst em of fixation  of allowed time , change in productivity  
due to incentive  scheme, incidents of overtime  in conjunction with each increase 
in bonus  payment etc.  The initial documents  (such as gate  attendance  cards , job 
cards , squad summary cards  and idle time  cards ) should be aud ited to the extent 
possible.  
During check of piece -work  time sheets  the following points should be seen:  
(Chapter 4 of Rolling  Stock  Code )  
I) Details of actual time  spent, wages  and profit  earned, and the rate  fixed  
for the j ob are furnished in piece -workers  statements to enable a check to 
be exercised over the correctness of profits  distributed;  
II) Where the piece -work  system  results in a lo ss, the procedure outlined in 
paras 418 and 420  of Rolling  Stock  Code , is observed, where the  loss is 
not recovered owing to its falling in a subsequent wage period, the 
desirability of avoiding it by revising the system  of profits  suitably may 
have to be suggested to the Administration . 
It should be seen that the piece -work  rates are reviewed at intervals  by a 
competent  authority  to ensure they are reasonable and the conclusions drawn in 
some su ch revi ews may be test checked. A similar procedure should be followed 
where a bonus  system  is in force.  
The introduction of bonus  system  should normally result in increased outturn  and 
reduced cost  per unit  of outturn .  Where this is not so, it may be necessary to seek 
justification  of the system  by a reference to the administrative authorities .  
7.6 Allowed  Time  
This is assessed on the assumption that under non -incentive  conditions, an 
average  employee will work  at a rating  of 60 units . The same worker whil e 
working under incentive  conditions would be expected to improve his rating to 
80 units i.e. 33 -1/3% more. It is expected that an average  worker would complete 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
439 
For internal use of IA&AD  an operation  in 3/4 of the allowed time .  The instructions  mentioned in para 404  
of Rolling  Stock  Code  applies to a udit of allowed time . 
Points to be seen by Audit  
I) That the time  saved/lost  on the time  allowed in each operation  is 
calculated separately for each worker and t he gain/ loss  is not carried over 
to the next month .  
II) Allowed  time of elemental activities is not sta gnated for more than five 
years.  
III) Allowed  time for elemental activities  has to be reviewed at least every 
five years through a work  study.  
7.7 Muster  Rolls Cum  Labour  Pay Sheets  
The instructions  contained in para 33 2-335 of Rolling  Stock  Code  should be 
followed during the check of muster  rolls cum labour  pay sheets  prepared in the 
workshops . Gate  Attendance  captured by the Bio -Metric system  is treated as the 
initial record of attendance , taking the place of Muster  Rolls ( 332 of Rolling Stock  
Code ). 
Points to be seen by Audit  
I) To see that result o f attendance  captured by bio -metric system  is properly 
recorded in system  in the appropriate  columns viz. time  lost/gained, (as 
relevant to the incentive  scheme if any) and 'overtime '. 
II) To check the correctness of relevant information furnished in the labour  
sheet viz. ‘Total time  gained/ lost ', 'Total Hours  worked during the 
month ’, ‘Total time  for deductable absence from the wages ', Deductable 
absence for 'DA ', 'OT’ due under the Factories  Act' and 'other overtime '. 
(332 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
III) To ensure that deductible absence is shown in muster  cum labour  pay 
sheets  in days and hours and deductions for half a day is made at 1/60th 
or 1/62nd etc.  or full day at 1/30th or 1/31st etc. of monthly  pay, as the 
case may be ( 335 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
7.8 Miscellaneous  Advances  and Deposits  Miscella neous  Registers  
The ins tructions  contained in paragraph  9.3.4 in Chapter 3 on Audit of Accounts  
Depart,emt  should be observed.  
7.9 Stores  Manag ement  
The instructions  and checks  are to be applied as per Chapter 5 of Indian  Railway 
Rolling  Stock  code.  
7.9.1  Material  for Jobs  
Material  for jobs  undertaken in the workshops  and maintenance  depots  (Loco  
sheds  and Coaching  Depots (LCD ) are obtained from various sources viz (i) 
Workshop  Stores  Main Depot , attached to workshops . (ii) General  Stores Depot 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
440 
For internal use of IA&AD  (iii) Other Division  or Railways  (vi) Workshops  (manufactured items) (v) Orders 
placed by Controller  of Stores (COS ) for direct  delivery of non -stock  items (vi) 
M&P  items from suppliers  against orders placed by COS / COFMOW  (Central  
Organization  for Modernization  Of Workshops). (Para 502 of Rolling  Stock  
Code ). 
7.9.2  Sub Stores  
Every segment of Workshop / Production  Unit as well as LCDs have an attached 
sub -store  under the control  of the shop  supervisor who is responsible for proper 
accountal of receipt  of material  from main stores  and their usage. ( Para 506 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code )  
Points to be seen in Audit  
It should be seen that,  
I) Item locations  are properly labeled and documented .  
II) Withdrawal  from main stores  to sub-stores  is done on a daily basis against 
stock  requisitions.  
III) Accountal  against job cards  is done on the basis of actual usage.  
IV) Items in the sub stores  are on shop  suspense  account  till they are charged 
to the job card.  
7.9.3 Pairing of Issue  Notes  
(Para 507-508 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
During the check of issue  notes  issued by Workshop  Stores  Depots  it should be 
seen that: - 
I) the shop  serial numbers (i.e. Requisition  Numbers) of the issue  notes  for 
each shop  are continuous and breaks in such continuity, if any, are 
satisfactorily explained;  
II) Issue  notes  are received strictly according to schedule  i.e., by the evening 
of the day following the date of issue ; 
III) Issue  Notes  have been correctly prepared according to the ins tructions  
issued for this purpose; and  
IV) Issue  notes  are 'paired' with the Bill  copies and with the Store Debit 
summary of Issues  as laid  down in paragraph  (Para 508 of Rolling  Stock  
Code )  
7.9.4  Provisional  Adjustment  of Issue  Notes  
A register  should be maintained by Accounts  showing the issue  notes  adjusted 
provisionally against a suspense  work  order entitled "wrong work  order".  
It should be seen that the register  is put up to the Workshop  Accounts  Officer by 
the first week of every month  and further the co rrect allocation  is ascertained as 
expeditiously as possible and that appropriate  adjustments  are made.( 509 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
441 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.9.5 Adjustment  of Cost of Stores  Received From Depots  
It should be seen that grand total of all sub ledgers  agrees with the totals of the 
monthly  stores  Debit summary.  
7.9.6 Stores  Sub Ledger  
The value of stores  allocated to various work  orders is abstracted shop -wise in 
the stores  sub-ledger  (Para 510 of Rolling  Stock  Code ). The check of stores  sub 
ledger  is intended to ensure correctness of the store  debits /credits  and their 
allocation  to the respective work  orders. Under  the computerized  system  `stores  
tabulations ' showing voucher -wise amount of stores  issued, stores  over-held for 
each work  order take the place of stores  sub-ledger . The vouchers  selected for 
audit  should be traced into the machine  prepared stores  tabulation . The 
arithmetical  check of the valuation  of the stores  vouchers  may be restricted to 
50%.  
7.9.7 Miscellaneous  Stores  Sub-Ledger  
Besides the Labour  and Stores  charges , certain Miscellaneous  charges  e.g. 
Municipal  Taxes such as Wheel  Tax and License for Motor  Lorries, Cost of 
electric  current , Water  charges , Shunting  charges , Demurrage  charges , Carriage  
of materi als and Other charges  are booked to 'Workshop  Manufacture  Suspense  
Accounts . 
The vouchers  relating to payments for such items as selec ted for audit  should, in 
addition to being traced into cash  book and journal , also be traced into the 
Miscellaneous  sub-ledger , as the later has to be referred to while checki ng the 
Workshop  Account  Current  (Para 525-530 of Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
7.9.8 Advice  Notes  of Returned  Stores  
The procedure prescribed  for returning stores  to Stores  Depots  and accoun ting for 
the same should be generally examined. ( Chapter XVI -S) and (Para 215 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
While checking the advice notes  of returned stores  the following points require 
special  attention: - 
I) The stores  returned should be promptly acknowledged by the Stores  
Department . 
II) Quantity acknowledged must tally with the quantity returned.  
III) The correctness of the allocation  of the credit  should be checked.  
IV) The rate  at which credit  is afforded should be reasonable.  
V) Cases in which the valuation  of returned stores  by the returning 
department differs gr eatly from that given by the stores  department, then 
the same should be investigated and reasons for the difference examined 
to see how it was reconciled.  
 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
442 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.9.9 Material  Gate  Passes  
When material  is required to be sent out of the shops , a machine -numbered gate  
pass must be issued, with a complete list of the material  passing out. Audit  should 
be conducted as per  Paras  330-331 of Rolling  Stock  Code . 
7.10 Workshop  Accounts  
The outl ay on works  undertaken in the workshops  falls into the following classes: 
- (1) Direct  charges  for labour , (2) Direct charges  for stores , and (3) Shop , General  
and Proforma  on cost . 
Workshop  Manufacture  Suspense  Account  (WMS ) 
Para 754 of  Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  states that  all expenditure  
incurred by workshops  in respect of Production  and ma intenance of   
Rolling stock are routed through WMS  account. The instructions for 
preparing Journal  entries of all transactions affecting WMS account for 
monthly  Account Current  for incorpo ration in General  Books  and 
Review of balances under WMS Account are envisaged in Para 771 
and 778 of Indian Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code .   
During Audit  it should be s een that Suspense  balances on WMS  
accounts should be critically examined to see whether negative balance 
reflects; if so, the detailed reasons investigated.  Reconciliation of balance under 
WMS account as per General  Book and Outturn Statement has been made and 
there is no difference between the two balances.  
7.10.1  Labour Charges  
The important initial documents  in connection with labour  charges  are (1) 
Absentee  statements; (2) Gate  attendance  cards ; (3) Time sheets ; (4) Muster  rolls 
and Labour  pay sheets ; and (5) Overt ime sheets . 
Labour  sub – ledger  (Annexure 5.1 and 5.2 of  Rolling  Stock  code)  
Labour  sub-ledger  is a summary of the total amount of time  against each work  
order shown in various timesheets of each shop . The object of checking the labour  
sub-ledger  is to ensure accuracy  of the evaluation  of time  spent on work  orders, 
levy of overheads and ultimately posting into the Workshop  Gener al Register . 
The statement “details of labour  charges ” generated on computer , which gives 
details of work  order in respect of each labour  charges , prima -facie 
misclassification should be scrutinised in audit  every month  with a view to 
examine the reasons for misclassifications and the action  taken to rectify them.  
7.10.2  Labour  Pay Sheets  
Labour  pay sheets  of the workshop staff  are prepared on the computer  by same 
system  as for pay  roll preparation of other staff . The instructions  regarding audit  
of computerized  pay will therefore apply to check of computer printed  labour  pay 
sheets  also. 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
443 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.10.3  Over  time  
Over  time vouchers  should be examined to see that the allowed overtime  is 
covered  by rules . The system  of over time  in vogue may be examined to see that 
it is consistent with efficiency  and economy . 
7.10.4  Audit  Of Computerized  Incentive  Bills  
I) Direct  workers  
The incentive  bonus  bills for direct  workers  are printed  on the computer  
shop -wise showing ticket No., shop  and section  code, time  taken, time  
saved or lost , amount saved or lost and the amount payable. The details of 
employee category, shop  No., and total ‘allowed time ’ are available in a 
separate statements  called ‘Ticket -wise tabulation  for the month ’. 
Wherever the ‘ticket -wise tabulation ’ or Details of ‘Job  Cards statement' 
is comprehensive and contains details of amount payable, setup time , 
proceeding time  and `allowed time ' for each unit , audit  scrutiny may be 
restricted merely to the agreement of entries in the statement with the 
information on the job cards . Arithmetical check on accuracy  of 
calculations being restricted to 50% of the transactions selected for audit .  
The entries in the job card relating to the `Allo wed Time' (viz. set -up time  
allowed, operation  time etc.) should be checked with reference to the 
scroll sheet maintained in the Production  Department , provid ed such 
scroll sheet itself is not computer  printed . If the scroll sheet is printed  on 
the computer, the particulars may be checked with other relevant records 
e.g. rate  fixer's records etc .  
II) Incentive  Bonus  Bill of indirect  workers  
These bills  printed  shop -wise and section -wise show for each ticket No., 
the num ber of hours worked, the average  percentage  earned, the number 
of hours earned, the rate  and the total amount earned. A subsidiary  
statement printed  on the computer  is the ‘Incentive  Statement’ showing 
Section -wise Standard  Hours  and Average Percentage for Essential 
Indirect  Workers, which gives the time  taken, the time saved and the 
standard hours of the section . Based upon this, the average  percentage  
earned and 80% of the average percentages as applicable to the 
Chargemen of the Incentive Section are worked out.  The entries relating 
to the time  taken and the time  saved are susceptible to verification  with 
reference to the details in Ticket -wise Tabulation  for the corresponding 
shop  and section , and should be so checked in Audit .  As regards the 
standard hours, which are reckoned with reference to the total number of 
workers  in the section , it is necessary to obtai n an intermediate print -out 
showing the number of workers  in the Incentive Section.  Check  of the 
arithmetical  calculations in respect of standard hours and average 
percentage  earned by direct  workers  etc. may be limited to 50% of the 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
444 
For internal use of IA&AD  cases selected for audit .  The deductions made in the bonus  payable to 
indirect  workers  on the basis of idle time  booked against direct  workers  
under their control , may be checked with reference to idle time  cards .  
During this check the computer generated idle time  statement should also 
be checked with reference to idle time  cards .  
The audit  of incentive  bills both for direct  and indirect  workers  shou ld be 
supplemented by a periodical  review of the action  taken on error  statements 
produced on the computer  as below: - 
I) The reconciliation  statement printed  in respect of direct  workers  should 
be checked once a quarter to see that errors  have been correctly rectified 
particularly in respect of losses.  
II) The action  taken on the statement of cards  printed  in the processing of 
essential indirect  workers ’ incentive  bills which shows cases of essential 
indirect  workers  not prim a facie employed in the i ncentive  sections  should 
be reviewed every month .  
III) Similarly the statement "Gate  Attendance  Hours  Reconciliation --Details 
for un -reconciled ticket numbers" should be reviewed and the correctness 
of action  taken thereon should be test checked in audit .  
The statement of Abnormal Profits and Losses which shows all cases of profits  
exceeding 50% and all cases of losses for the year should be reviewed to see that 
remedial  action  is taken to revise the "allowed time ”. 
7.10.5  On Cost  
These charges  represent expenditure  which cannot be allocated to any particular 
work  order.  Such charges  are classified  as follows: - (1) Proforma  on-cost, (2) 
General  on-cost, (3) Shop  on-cost. 
A description of General  and Shop  on cost  and Proforma  on cost  and how the 
charges  are to be arrived at and distribu ted in each case are contained in chapter 
6 of Rolling  stock  code. It should be seen whether the distribution  of on -cost is 
accurately made according to the code principles . These instructions  may be 
followed during the audit  of on cost  charges .  
The debits  booked under the various on -cost work  orders should be scrutinized to 
see that they are not used as a dumping ground  for charges  which can be allocated 
directly to other work  orders.  
In the case of individual work  orders taken up for audit , it should be seen that the 
correct charges  have been levied.  
7.10.6  Compiled  Accounts  
In order to collect  all charges  on account  of labour  and stores  on work  orders a 
Workshop  General  Register  (WGR -ledger ) is prepared from the allocated 
abstracts and summaries  of labour  and stores .  The Outturn  Statement ( 758-767 
of Rolling  Stock  Code ) is posted there  from, which shows the cost  of all works  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
445 
For internal use of IA&AD  including those charged off each month , completed jobs  awaiting acceptance or 
adjustments  and works  in progress as mentioned in paragraphs  755-780 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code . 
The postings into the final books  of the amount spent during the month  on each 
work  order taken up for audit  up to the preparation of the Outturn  Statement ( Para 
758-767 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) and the Account  Current , should be checked.  
The outstanding  in outturn  statement should be scrutinized to see that there has 
been no delay in preparation of the bills  or in getting the acceptance of the parties 
concerned, and that the outstanding are such as should form a proper charge 
against workshop suspense .  It should also be seen that the operations  are all 
current  and undertaken under sanction of Competent  Authority , that credit  items 
in the details of balance  are noted for immediate adjustment, and that the details 
of balance  under each work  order consist only of labour  and materials  expended 
upon unfinished works .  
Where the Workshop  General  Register  (WGR ) is printed  monthly  on the 
compu ter (as against one consolidated document showing the progressive  posting 
from month  to month ) and does not show the month  of origin and the trend of 
booking  expenditure , the accuracy  of the compilation  may be checked at the time  
of checking outturn  statement and the review of WGR carried out along with the 
review of "Workshop Ma nufacture  Suspense  Balances".  
7.10.7  Outturn  Statement  
It should be seen that the adjustment of outlay  is effected monthly  or on 
completion  in accordance  with the rules  on the subject.  The unadjusted items of 
expenditure  should be scrutinized to see that there are no minus balances, that 
there is no outlay  on jobs  prior to issue  of work  orders, that there are no completed 
jobs outstanding  for more than three months, and that outlay  on works  for which 
no estimates  have been sanctioned  is held under objection.  
The expenditure  on completed works  chargeable  to Capital , Depreciation  Reserve  
Fund , Development  Fund and/or Revenue  is posted into the Capital Works  and 
Revenue Allocation  Registers respectively.  It should be seen that the closing 
balance  in workshop suspense  agrees with the General  Books  every month .  The 
debits  on account  of labour  pay sheets  appear in the General Books i n the 
following month .  As the value of labour  employed in the shops  must be charged 
to the works  concerned in the month  in which the labour  was engaged though not 
paid f or, until the following month , the total labour  will, in the first instance, be 
taken to the debit  side of the Account  Current  and credited  to the sub -head  
"Labour " in the Workshop  Suspense  Account, vide paragraph  221-A.  The 
analysis of the balance  under this suspense  head  according to the details in the 
Labour Book ( Para 776 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) should be checked and the balance  
reconciled with the General Books.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
446 
For internal use of IA&AD  Under  the computerized  system  of preparation of check sheets  as provided in para 
756 of Rolling  Stock  Code  for ensuring  the correctness of posting of labour  and 
stores  in the Workshop  General  Register  and correct transfer of amount to the 
outturn  statement, has been dispensed wi th.  The accuracy  of the postings should, 
therefore, be checked with reference to the relevant sub -ledgers .  The postings in 
the outturn  statement and the WGR  should also be mutually agreed.  The  review 
of the outstanding  under the Workshop General Register  (WGR) should be 
supplemented by a review of the computer  generated statement called "Monthly  
review of Wor kshop General Registers " and the statement "Review of credit  and 
irregular WMS  balances".  
Guidelines  for Rolling  Stock  manufactured by Repair Work shops : 
Some Repair Workshops  are engaged in manufacture of Rolling  Stock  for other 
Railways  (supply  to Railway  Board ) and also Railway/other PSUs . The following 
Guidelines  are laid  down;  
I) In general, all provisions contained in Chapter -II of Indian  Railway  
Rolling  Stock  Code  (from Para 206 to 23 5) are applicable to Production  
Shops of Repair Workshops  engaged in Rolling Stock  production ; 
II) However, the levy  of Shop  and General  on Cost for Production  Shops may 
be charged as a percentage  of Direct  labour , as per present practice  in 
Repair Workshops ; 
III) The amount of Depreciation  and Repair & Maintenance  to Plant  & 
Machinery  and Buildings  of Shops involved in production  activities 
should be charged to Factory  Overheads , while arriving at the pre -
determined rate  for Labour  on Cost and Stores  on Cost respectively, of 
Production  Shops;  
IV) While booking  the expenditure  of Feeder Shops for the production  
activity, all basic elements of cost (Material , Labour  on Costs), along with 
applicable percentage  of Proforma  on Cost on total Labour Cost of Feeder 
Shops, must be levied. (Para 235 of Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
Total (debits ) for the month , in respect of each Work  Order under Labour  Stores  
and On -cost Charges  and the grand total should be struck in the Workshop  
General  Register  and an Outturn  Statement ( Para 758 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
should then be prepared, showing all Work Or ders, whether in hand  or completed, 
in Workshops , the outlay  on which is awaiting adjustment and the expenditure  
that was incurred on each of them. This Statement is necessary for charging t he 
total expenditure  incurred in Workshops to concerned Account  Heads.  
 
 
 
 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
447 
For internal use of IA&AD  WORKSHOP OUTTURN STATEMENT  
(Form - Para 758 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
For the Month…………………….. 20………..  
Previous Expenditure  
Work  Order 
No. Allocation  Authority  For whom 
executed  Particulars  Estimates  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
      
 
Previous Expenditure  Charges  during the month  
Direct  Charges  
Opening 
Balance  Adjusted 
during the 
month  Unadjusted  Direct  
Labour  Incentive  
Bonus  Direct  
Stores  
7 8 9 10 11 12 
      
 
Charges  during the month  Works  on-cost 
Overhead Charges  Labour  
on cost  Stores  
on cost  
Opening 
Balance  Adjusted 
during 
the 
month  Unadjusted  Direct  
Labour   Incentive  
Bonus   Direct  
Stores  
13 14 15 16 17 18 
      
 
Admin on cost /Pro-
forma on cost  Grand Total  Credits during the month  Closing Balance  
19 20 21 22 
    
Column 1 to 12 and 20 to 22 are common to Production  units  and Zonal  Railway  
workshops . Column 13 to 16 are only  for Production units and Columns 17 to 19 are 
only for Zonal Railway workshops . 
Complied by………………….. Checked by  
Accounts  Officer  
(Authority : Para 758 of Indian  Railway  Rolling  Stock  code)  
 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
448 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.10.8  Workshop  Account  Current  
Paragr aphs 769-770 of Rolling  Stock  Code  detail the method of preparation of 
Workshop  Account  Current .  During the course of audit :- 
I) The opening balance  should be checked with the closing balance  of the 
previous month ,  
II) The posting under ea ch head  both on debit  and credit  side, should be 
checked with the supporting schedules,  
III) The arithmetical  accuracy  should be checked,  
IV) It should be seen that the advices receiv ed from the Accounts  Office  have 
been incorporated in the accounts , and   
V) The closing balance  should be analysed to see that the items are current  
and there are no old outstan ding items.  
In addition, the labour  schedules should also be subjected to check with reference 
to the labour  sub-ledger  and tabulation  statement for indirect  workers  (cumulative 
expense wise tabulation  for which necessary intermediate printout be obtained 
from the Railway  Administration ). 
7.10.9  Works  Registers and Reven ue Allocation  Registers  
The instructions  for the audit  of registers  of works  and revenue allocation  
registers  contain ed in Paragraphs  9 of chapter on Works  Audit  also apply to these 
registers .  It should be seen that the interest  on the capital  expenditure  incurred 
by the Railway  during the period of construction  of works  for the use of other 
departments  is correctly calculated and charged against the department concerned 
in accordance w ith the rules  laid down in paragraph  1854 -E. 
7.10.10 Transfer  Statements or Memos  
It should be seen that full particulars including the reasons and authority  for the 
adjustments  and the heads of accounts  affected, are furnished, and that such 
adjustments are warranted and not made merely to hide irregular ities, e.g. to avoid 
excesses over estimates  or appropriations  or to utilize savings.  
7.11 History  Sheet  of Rolling  Stock  
The ext ent to which the repair charges  to Rolling  Stock  are subdivided is 
determined by Railway  Administration  in consultation with their Accounts  
Officers in su ch a way as to obtain the most effective control  of the expenditure  
with the minimum cost  in accounting labour . The Senior  Audit  Officer/ Assistant  
Audit Officer will see that a proper system  of subdivision  of these charges  exists.  
It should be seen that whenever a unit  of Rolling  Stock  is condemned , replaced 
or broken up, this action  is taken only after the said  unit has been examined and 
recorded as unserviceable  by competent  authority . Further, this f act is noted in its 
history sheets  and that statistics of all Rolling Stock  indicating whether the stocks 
has passed its normal life, has been condemned but not replaced, or has been 
replaced but still running  are properly maintained. The registers  of Rolling Stock 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
449 
For internal use of IA&AD  should be checked to verify that they are up -to-date, that all recent transactions 
are incorporated and include results of the last census  of stocks that has be en 
taken.  
7.12 Statistics  of Periodical  Overhaul  and Cost of Unit  Repair.  
The general review prescribed  in this item is only check of the figures which has 
to be carried out as an item of audit  to ensure that the unit  costs, etc., are correctly 
derived from the accounts  of the workshops  before they are used for the purpose 
of the budget  and control  by the internal  check authorities .  In the course of this 
general review there is no objection to any palpable variations being brought to 
the notice of the Branch  Officer by the Assistant  Audit  Officer/ Secti on Officer 
concerned. In offering any criticism based on the statistics the provisions 
contained in Paragraphs  624-628 and Paragraph 730 of Rolling  Stock  Code  to be 
borne in min d. 
7.13 Proforma  Capital  and Revenue  Accounts  of Saloons Reserved for the 
Exclusive Use of Other  Departments  
The accounts  are prepared according to the rules  laid down in Para 726-729 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code . 
Points to be seen during Audit  
I) The figures of Capital  and Revenue  expenditure  should be checked.  
II) It should be seen that the Capital  accounts  show the upto -date capital  cost 
of each saloon and the Revenue  accounts  show the expenditure  incurred 
from year to year by the railway , whether in the workshops  or on line  for 
maintenance  and repairs  
III) To ensure that cases in which the recoveries  made from the department 
concerned fall short of the actual expenditure  incurred by the railway  are 
reported.  
IV) To see that all saloons  reserved for other departments  have been included 
in the proforma account  
7.14 Outsourcing  
Adherence to the instructions  contained in Chapter 11 of Indian  Railway  Rolling  
Stock  should be examined during audi t of work  outsourced by 
Workshops /Coaching  depots / Loco  Sheds . This includes outsourcing  to units  
outside workshops  and outsourced inside or contracting for work  within railway  
premises ( Para 1103 -1106  of Rolling Stock  Code ).  
It should be ensured that outsourcing  is resorted only under unavoidable 
circumstances mentioned in para 1103 of Rolling  Stock  Code . 
The guidelines  mentioned in para 1 104 –1106 of Rolling  Stock  Code  should be 
followed for outsourcing  of work  outside /within Railway  premises.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
450 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.15 Annual  Maintenance  of M&P  
(Para 1114  of Rolling  Stock  Code ). 
It should be ensured that the mainten ance cover for M&P  is adequately provided 
by way of annual  maintenance  contracts  with the original equipment  
manufacturers (OEMs) or their authorized age nts, where feasible, to ensure that 
the assets  are productively utilized with adequate uptime. Such annual  
maintenance  contracts  can also be concluded at the time  of purchase  of M&P item 
by factoring -in the AMC  cost along with the purchase  price. The objective  of 
AMCs shall be to provide a high  up-time for the M&P items by pro viding a 
reliable maintenance  support . 
7.16 Maintenance  of Asset  Register  
(Para 1037 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
Points to be seen  
I) To ensure that after commissioning  of new  machine  it is entered in the 
Asset  Register  of M&P   
II) To see that Unified 9 -digit code is allot ted correctly as per para 1037  
indicating Zonal  Railway , Sub location, Machine  shop , individual 
machine  number.  
III) To see that no machine  is kept in service  without unified code number 
prominently painted on the machine  for easy identification .  
IV) To see that it is removed from Asse t Register  when disposed off and 
transferred to other Railways . 
7.17 Codal  life and Condemnation  of Rolling  Stock  
(Para 1007 -1013  of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
As per para 1007 of Rolling  Stock  Code , the codal  Life of a particular type of 
stock  denotes an average  economic  life, assumed for the specific purpose of 
making long term planning  to assess future requirements.  Codal Life  for different 
kinds of rolling -stock  is given in the Accounts  code and as advised by Railway  
Board  from time  to time . 
Points to be seen during Audit  
I) To see that sanction of competent  authority  is obtained for normal 
condemnation of Rolling  Stock  or under aged Rolling Stock  as indicated 
in para 1012 -1103  of Rolling Stock Code  with or without finance 
concurrence as the case may be.  
II) To see that as and when any Rolling  Stock  reaches a shop  for Periodical  
Overhaul  (POH ) at the fag end of its life [i.e. last POH before attaining 
codal  life], the CWM  has assessed the suitability of the R olling Stock  to 
work  beyond the codal life stipulated and certify the same.  
III) To see that in case of condemnation of under -aged Rolling  Stock , proper 
procedure is followed as per para 1009  of Rolling Stock  Code  and 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
451 
For internal use of IA&AD  sanction of competent  authority  is obtained as  per para 1012 -1013  of 
Rolling Stock Code . 
IV) To see that once condemnation is approved , necessary action  for issue  of 
deletion advice is issued by CME  office, disposal  of Rolling  Stock  
through Stores  department is done after excluded components  are 
collected and accounted for in the depot  records.  
V) To see that condemnation of under aged Rolling  Stock  is monitored 
effectively by Zonal  Railway  and monthly  report is furnished to Railway 
Board  (Para 1013  of Rolling Stock  Code ) 
VI) To see that credit  to owning Rai lway  is transferred by railway  
condemning and disposing of the Rolling  Stock  within the same financial  
year.  
7.18 Maintenance  of Weigh Bridges  & Weighing  Scales  
(Para 131 of Rolling  Stock  Code )  
Mechanical  Department  is responsible for maintenance  and certification  of the 
Weigh Bridges  & Weighing  Scales . It should be seen that Weigh Bridges  
&Weighing Scales  which are in commercial  use in various Railway  units  are 
maintained in accordance with the relevant Acts  on ‘Weights & Measures’, and 
instructions /circulars  issued by Railway Board  from time  to time . 
7.19 POH  of Rolling  Stock  hired to/owned  by Defence  Department  
The mechanical department of the owning Railway  is responsible for collecting 
the information of POH  carried out, on both, Railway -owned  and De fence -owned  
coaches  and wagons  (Para 730 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
Points to be seen during Audit  
I) To see that POH  is carried out on the due date with the highest priority 
ensuring proper quality . 
II) To see that Annual  charges /repairs  and maintenance  charges  are 
calculated and preferred as per codal  provisions for Rolling  Stock  of 
Defence  department (hired to /own ed by defence department as the case 
may be)  
7.20 Loaning/Hiring  for Rolling  Stock  loaned/hired to outside Parties and other 
Government  Departments  
The present day replacement  cost of the Rolling  Stock  shall form the basis for 
calculation of hiring/loaning charges  for Rolling Stock  loaned/hired to private  
parties/Government  departments  (Para 731-732 of Rolling Stock Code ). 
Points to be  seen during Audit   
I) To see that present day cost  of Rolling  Stock  is calculated as per para 731 
of Rolling Stock  Code . 
II) To see that charges  for loani ng /hiring of Rolling  Stock  are worked out as 
per para 732 of Rolling Stock  Code  which inter alia include interest  and 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
452 
For internal use of IA&AD  dividend  charges , depr eciation , loss  of earning to Railways , cost  of POH  
and charges  for special  repairs  and contingencies  
III) To see th at charges  as above are duly vetted by associated Accounts . 
7.21 Hiring  Charges  For Plant  & Machinery  Let Out To Contractors  
Hiring  charges  for the Railway ’s Plant  and Machinery  hired by the contractor for 
use on the work  being executed by him shall be decided in advance in consultation 
with Finance  and incorpor ated in the special  conditions of contract  (Para 733 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code). 
Points to be seen during Audit  
I) To see that hiring charges  are worked out as per para 733 of Rolling  Stock  
Code  and levied accordingly to inter alia include, interest  on capital  cost, 
ordinary repairs  and maintenance  charges , special  repairs  and 
maintenance  charges  and depreciation ..  
II) To see that charges  are payable from the day the plant is handed over to 
the contractor , to the day it is returned by him (Excluding the period when 
it is out of order or sent for POH ). 
7.22 Sale of Heritage  Rolling  Stock  
Heritage  Rolling  Stock includes all types of Steam locos, all NG coaches  and 
Wooden Body Saloons/Special  coaches  of all gauges, Oldest of a particular kind/ 
class/ special  purpose Rolling Stock , Rolling Stock over 100 years old, Rolling 
Stock identified/selected to be of special  significance. The sale of heritage Rolling 
Stock shall be initiated only by the Heritage Directorate  (Para 734 of Rolling 
Stock Code ). 
During check it should be seen that codal  provisions are followed for sale of 
heritage Rolling  Stock . 
7.23 Laboratory  Accounts  
Laboratories  are attached to the major  workshops  where tests of several articles  
are carried out. The Chemist and Metallurgist  who is in overall command of the 
Laboratory  will report to the CWM  or the Officer in charge of the shed  or depot , 
as the case may b e. (Para 110 of Rolling  Stock  Code ).  
It should be seen that the rates charged for tests by t he laboratory  are sufficient to 
cover the expenditure  incurred in running  the laboratory  and that the rates are 
revised periodically if the laboratory  accounts  show accumulation of profits . 
Where work  of outside parties is also carried out in the laboratories , it should be 
seen that recoveries  are properly made and credited  to laboratory  accounts .. 
7.24 Work  Orders  
A work  order is an order planned in the shops  to put certain work  in hand .  These 
orders are numbered in th e manner indicated in paragraphs  743-748 of Rolling  
Stock  Code  and all stores  and labour  utilised in execution  of a particular work  are 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
453 
For internal use of IA&AD  allocated to the work  order concerned. There are also a number of standing and 
stock  work  orders mostly relati ng to jobs  like repairs  to engines , vehicles, 
wagons , etc. and manufacture of spare parts for stock . Works  on capital  account , 
for other  departments , or on private  account , are given special  numbers.  
During check of work  orders, the following points should be borne in mind and 
it should be seen that the proced ure prescribed  therewith is generally in 
accordance with that laid  down in Chapter 7 of Indian  Railway  Rolling  Stock  
Code : - 
I) To see that no work  is undertaken without a work  order relating to it 
having been sanctioned  by competent  authority , vide paragraph  701 of 
Rolling  Stock  Code ;  
II) To see that all work  orders are recorded in a register  showing the work  
undertaken, the d ate of issue  of work  order, the date of commencement 
and completion  of the work  as mentioned in paragraph  749-751 of Rolling  
Stock  Code . 
III) To see that the acceptance of estimated cost  has been obtained for the 
works  undertaken for Government  departments , where charges  are to be 
adjusted through transfer transactions.  
IV) To ensure that the sanction of PHOD  of the executive  department has been 
obtained and the estimated cost  has been deposited for the works  
undertaken for Railway  employees . 
V) For works  undertaken for outsiders, whether the work  has the sanction of 
competent  authority , the estimated cost  has been deposited in advance, 
and in the event of excess over the estimated cost , the acceptance of the 
party to pay  the excess before the delivery of the item has been obtained. 
(751 of Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
VI) To see that guidelines  as mentioned in para 712 -713 of Rolling  Stock  
Code  are followed for preparation of estimates  of work  for outsiders ) 
7.25 Envi ronment  and Safety  
In 1986, the parliament enacted the Environment  Protection  Act. (EP Act.) for 
protection  and improvement of environment, which inclu des water , air and land  
and also the inter relationship that exists among and between water, air and land  
and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro -organism and property . 
Provision  of safety  officers in Workshops  has been separately mandated in the 
Factories  Act. Creating a work  place safe  not just for the employees , but the entire 
neighbourhood in an environmentally responsible manner is a specialized activity 
of the Environment and Safety  Manager  (ENSM).  (Para112  of Rolling  Stock  
Code ) 
Similar officers are appointed at bigger open line  establishments like Loco  Sheds / 
Coaching  Depo ts, as the impact  of these subjects will be going up in the years to 
come.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
454 
For internal use of IA&AD  The ENSM should be fully conversant with following Acts . 
I) The water - Prevention  and Control  of pollution  Act 1974  
II) The Air - Prevention  and control  of pollution  Act 1981 The Environment  
(Protection ) Act. 1986  
III) The Hazardous  Waste  (Management , Handling  and Trans Boundary 
Movement) Rules  2008  
IV) Factories  Act, 1948 Municipal  Solid  Waste  (Management  and Handling ) 
Rules  2000. (These acts are reckoned in EMS 14001 and OSHAS 18001 ) 
Points to be seen during Audit   
I) Whether effective system  exists  for monitoring , to ensure compliance  
with the statutory  obligations relating to air , water  and noise pollution  in 
workshops , sheds . 
II) To see that due importance is given for provision of control  equipment  
and keeping them in working condition.  
III) To see that effective steps are taken in  Workshops  and sheds  for proper  
disposal  of ETP sludge as per the guidelines  issued by the SPCB /CPCB , 
in order to prevent contamination of ground  water . 
IV) To see that well defined targets  are fixed  for all workshops , maintenance  
depots , sheds  for implementing energy  conservation measures  and their 
achievement is monitored.  
V) To see that a time  bound action  is drawn for harnessing renewable energy  
such as wind and solar energy so as to achieve targets  fixed  by Railway  
Board .  
VI) To ensure that instructions  issued by Railway  Board  for setting up of 
Water  Recycling Plants  and Rain Water Harvesting structures  are 
complet ed in a time  bound manner;  
VII) To see that, there exists a monitoring  mechanism  for strict observance of 
statutory  provisions regarding proper accounting, handling and disposal  
of hazardous wastes;  
VIII) To see that proper maintenance  of medical  records of the workers  of all 
workshops  and sheds  is ensured.  
8 POINTS TO BE SEEN DURING THE INSPECTION OF FIELD 
OFFICES  
The points to be seen during the inspection  of field offices of Mechanical  
department are shown in Annexure -II. 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
455 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure -I (Para  6)  
Details of IT  Applications  are as under: - 
I) Coaching  Maintenance  Management  System  (CMMS ) and  
II) Integrated  Coaching  Management  Systems  (ICMS ) 
I) COACHING  MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (CMMS )  
Coaching  Maintenance  Management  System  (CMMS ) is coaching  depot  
maintenance  module  software  developed by CRIS  used all over India  in Indian  
Railways .  The CMM  or Coach  Maintenance Management module has been 
developed to facilitate  and record the maintenance  of coaches  and the 
management  of spare p arts inventory . It is fully integrated  with the operations  
modules  for generating alerts, interchange of information, request for placement 
of Rolling  Stock  for repairs , delivery and acknowledgement  of certification  of 
coaches  for service , etc.  
Salient Features  
a) Rake  Maintenance  
Rake  examination, Rake release , Train  BPC, Print BPC , Create Rake , 
Rakes waiting for arrival . 
b) Coach  Maintenance  
Coach  PRO , Sick Marking , Schedule  (IOH /POH ) Booking , Sick 
Release , IOH Schedule Release , Coach Receive From Workshop . 
c) Coach  Master  
Search /Edit Coach , Coach Commission . 
d) Central  Applications  
Add Depot  Infrastructure , Depot Infrastructure Report . 
e) Bio Toilet  Fitment  
Bio Toilet  Fitment Form , Bio Toilet Report (Firm  & Zone Wise 
Report ). 
f) Reports  
Coach  PRO Details , Depot  Rake  Maintenance  Report , Rake 
Maintenance Status Report , Rake Wise Attention , Depot Current  
Position Report , Schedule  Booking  Details , 8Hrs Sick  line Position , 
18Hrs Sick line Position , IOH release details . 
g) Pivot  Table Reports  
POH  Arising , POH Over  Due, IOH Arising , IOH Over Due , Coach  
Master  Summary Report , Bio-Toilet  Summary Report , Sick Fit 
Summary Report , Rake  Wise Holding Report , Rake Maintenance  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
456 
For internal use of IA&AD  Pivot  Report , PU Coach Turnout Report , Coach Maintenance 
Management  Maintenance Status , Spare Coaches , Daily  Ineffective 
Report , En-route  Detachment Report , Punctuality  Loss Report . 
h) Coach  Maintenance  History  
Coach  Maintenance  History  
i) Coach  Complaints  
Coach  Complaints , Warranty  Complaint Report , Coach Complaint 
Remark , Warranty Complaints Pivot  Table . 
j) Objective  
Main objective  of softw are is to eliminate the paper work  of records 
in depot . Accordingly, BPC of outgoing rake  is being generated on 
system  and computed BPC is being issued to Platform supervisor at 
platfo rm. 
k) Remarks  
The software  is under development  stage. Presently basic modules  are 
being used. Main modules  and reports  are under development .  Once 
it is developed completely and reaches its mature stage, it will 
completely eliminate paper work  for generating reports related to 
coach  maintenance  activities. All records will be safely stored on the 
CRIS  server.  
II) INTEGRATED  COACHING S MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (ICMS ) 
It is used mainly for monitoring  of coaching  operations  like running  of coaching  
train (punctuality ), Coaching  Stock  management  and Time tabling  etc.  
Salient Features  
a) The COIS  (Coaching  Operations  Information  System ) module  
provides detailed, real -time information for planning , executing and 
monitoring  the operations  of passenger  services. Since the system  is 
aware of the plans , it requires minimal data input.  
b) The Punctuality  Analysis  & Monitoring  (PAM ) module  of ICMS  
automatically picks up the delays from the Control  Office  Application  
(COA ) and produces real -time insight into the state of the operations . 
The system  provides consistent and accurate reports  for all level of 
management , from operative to strategic . Since ICMS already has 
most of the related information, it is  the natural place to monitor and 
analyse the punctual  running  of trains  also. 
c) Train  operations  on the Indian  Railways  are controlled an d monitored 
by the Control  Rooms in each of the Divisional / area control  offices. 
The Control Room is the nerve centre of the Division . COA  is a 24X7 
application . It has changed the way the trains  are monitored as train 
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
457 
For internal use of IA&AD  movements are captured in real time  and movement of scheduled and 
unscheduled trains  planned and controlled through the computer  aided 
interface . 
d) Centralized  web based application  accessible from Division , Zone and 
Railway  Board  level, Monitoring  Punctuality  of all Passenger  carrying 
trains  over Indian  Railways  at all levels. Capturing train running  
timings and delays with its detention  details. Based on data captured 
from such sources, the system  generates various types of analytical 
and critical reports  at all levels.  
e) Automated, real -time reports  are generated b ased on COA  feed, and  
f) Punctuality  related activities are integrated  into a workflow.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
458 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure –II (Para  8)  
The points to be seen during the inspection  of field offices of Mechanical  
Department   
A.  Senior Divisional Mechanical Engineer (C&W) Office  (Sr. DME  (C&W)  
I) Review of files  related to policies pertaining to Mechanical  
Department . 
II) Review of works  programme  estimate , tender  contract  agreements 
contractor bills , final variation statements and completion  report s. 
III) Review of Budget  and expenditure  –Capital  and Revenue  heads.   
IV) Contractor bills  / Ledgers . 
V) Review of records related to Fuel  (HSD Oil)-Estimation  of 
requirement at Divisional  level, procurement  process, Distribution , 
utilisation and its proper accountal.  
VI) System  of accounting o f HSD  oil with special  reference to see that 
adequate arrangements exist for prevention of pilferage ,  
VII) Review of Bills  for HSD  oil etc. supplied at junctions by other 
Railways .  
VIII) Review of records related to ART  /ARME - maintenance  and 
utilisation, billing of ART charges / defects  in Rolling  Stock  received 
from privat e siding,  
IX) Billing  of crane charges  utilized for Private  Siding  /Parties.  
X) Review of records related to road side sick wagons  /coaches . 
XI) Monitoring  of work  in progress on Division .  
XII) Review of records related to On Board  Housekeeping Scheme  
(OBHS ) 
XIII) Review of records related to repairs  and maintena nce of Rolling  Stock  
viz Coaches , wagons  and other vehicles.  
XIV)  Review of records pertaining to Defects noticed in Coaches , Wagons , 
Locos  and other vehicles turned out from workshop after POH .  
XV) Review of records pertaining to Modernisation of C&W Depots   
XVI)  Review of records related to Stores  Management , from Inden ts to 
local  purchases.  
XVII)  Repairs  and maintenance  of weighbridges /weighing machines .  
XVIII)  MTOs and adjustment memos.  
XIX)  All Environment  related subjects.  
XX) Correspondence relating to Accidents.  
XXI)  Damages  to Rolling  Stock  in siding while in charge of siding owner.  
XXII)  Condemnation  of Coaches  and Wagons .   
XXIII)  Condemnation  of vehicles and M&P  items of all departments . 
XXIV)  Review of PCDOs to CME .   
XXV)  T&P Register .  
XXVI)  RTI cases.  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
459 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXVII)  All types of passenger  complaint s correspondence pertaining to trains  
running  on/ through Divisions . 
XXVIII)  Review of Inspection  notes  of GM , PHODs , HODs etc,  
XXIX)  Review of  previous outstanding  audit  objections.  
XXX)  Recovery  of hire charges  for locos loaned to Engineering . Department  
/Private  Parties / siding etc. 
XXXI)  Sick line capacity and its utilisation.  
XXXII)  Establishment  matters  
XXXIII)  Other Non -establishment matters. [As shown in Annexure –II (a)]  
B. C&W Depots :- 
Review of records pertaining to - 
I) IOH of coaches /wagons  
II) Special  repairs  to Coaches /Wagons   
III) Daily  maintenance  of Rolling  stock  as per Manual . 
IV) Review of contracts  for maintenance  and other activities viz. cleaning 
of bio -toilets, pest control  of coaches , work  outsourced etc.  
V) Rolling  stock  overdue for POH .   
VI) Repair of wagons  damaged during mechanized loading /unloading  and 
preferring of bills  against the siding owners.  
VII) Review of  records related to procurement  and utilization of fuel (HSD  
oil)  
VIII) Stores  Accounts .  
IX) Repairs  and maintenance  of Machines  at Depots   
X) Maintenance  and utilization of ART /ARME  
XI) Billing  for utilisation of ART /ARME  by other government 
departments /private  parties.  
XII) Damages  and defects  –secondary sick marking.  
XIII) Running  rooms  
XIV)  Review of records related to Repair & Maintenance  of Weigh Bridges . 
XV) Repair of Rolling  Stock  marked sick.  
XVI)  En-route  examination of trains  /wagons .  
XVII)  Condemnation  of rolling stock .  
XVIII)  Repairs  and maintenance  of tower  wagons .  
XIX)  Attending passenger  complaints .  
XX) Environmental  issues.  
XXI)  Establishment  matters.  
XXII)  Other Non -establishment matters. (As shown in Annexure –II(a) ) 
C. Workshops (Coaching /Wagons)  
Review of records pertaining to - 
I) Targets assigned and achievement thereof.  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
460 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Detention  of wagons /coaches  in workshop (prior to, during /after  
POH ) 
III) Delays in POH  of Wagons /Coaches   
IV) Special  repairs  to Coaches /Wagons   
V) Review of infrastructure  available and its utilization.  
VI) Constraints due to lack of infrastructure  /machines /faulty machines   
VII) Utilisation of man power . 
VIII) POH  of private /jointly owne d wagons  /Coaches -Proper  accountal and 
recovery of charges  as per prescribed  rates from private  parties.  
IX) Work  undertaken for outsid ers and other govt /semi govt bodies - 
Proper  accountal and recovery of charges  as per prescribed  rates from 
private  parties.  
X) Financial  adjustment for work  done for other Railways -proper debits  
to be raised or debits pending  for acceptance by other railways.  
XI) Review of contracts  awarded for maintenance  and other activities viz.  
cleaning, pest control  of coaches  etc. System  of procurement  and 
utilisation of stores  viz. stock  items, non -stock  items, local  purchases 
etc. 
XII) Premature  POH  of Wagons /Coaches   
XIII) Review of quality  of Rolling  Stock  
XIV)  Review of cycle  time of POH . 
XV) Review of quality  of POH  done (a) en -route  detachment of coaches  
(b) sick marking of coaches  within 100 days of POH.  
XVI)  Premature  condemnation of Wagons /Coaches .  
XVII)  Coaches /Wagons   overdue for POH . 
XVIII)  Cause wise analysis  of Wagons /Coaches  involved in accidents . 
XIX)  Withdrawal  of coaches  /wagons /locomotives  from service  and 
analysis  of reasons thereof.  
XX) Review of Work  order register -  
XXI)  Review of change in specification/design  of various types of coaches  
vis-à-vis procurement  of materials  for POH  
XXII)  Review of outsourcing  of workshop activities a nd economy  thereof.  
XXIII)  M & P  procured and their utilization.  
XXIV)  Review of Machinery  under repairs . 
XXV)  Review of allowed time  after introduction of new  M&P . 
XXVI)  Rejection of coaches  by Neutral Control  Organisation , Analysis  of 
Rejection, cause wise.  
XXVII)  Local  passing of wagons /coaches  rejected  by N eutral Control  Officer.  
XXVIII)  Results of ultrasonic testing  of manufacturing defects . 
XXIX)  Recovery  of testing  charges  wherever due.  
XXX)  Removal of rejected  materials  from the shop  floor.  
XXXI)  Shop  floor inventory  of stores . 
XXXII)  Idling of machinery and down time  statements.  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
461 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXIII)  Inspection  notes  of de partmental  officers.  
XXXIV)  Review of off -loading  of manufactured items to trade.  
XXXV)  Log book for machines . 
XXXVI)  Accountal  of stock /Non -stock  item of stores  received on shop  floor.  
XXXVII)  Review of stock  sheets  and their disposal . 
XXXVIII)  Review of system  of estimation and indenting of material  required.  
XXXIX)  Day bo ok receipt  and Day book issues.  
XL) Vital items out of stock .  
XLI) Collection  and disposal  of scrap /wastage material . 
XLII)  Occurrence of wastage, with ref erence to percentages, if any.  
XLIII)  Rejection of material  received from trade for manufacture of coaches , 
XLIV)  Critical stores  items affecting out -turn, 
XLV)  Review of Purchase  Orders , 
XLVI)  Review of non -moving /surplus  stores ,  
XLVII)  Review of Auction  sales , 
XLVIII)  Realization of credit  for the disposal  of condemned  coaches , 
XLIX)  Realization of debits  of the POH  costs from other Railways  for POH 
of coaches  done for them.  
L) Unit cost of POH  of coaches /Wago ns/Loco  and comparison  thereof.  
LI) Rejection of debits  raised against Zonal  Railways  for POH  of 
Coaches /Wagons /Locos , analysis  of reasons for rejection . 
LII) Acceptance of debits  for use of locos by workshop for shunting  
purposes.  
LIII) Establishment  matters.  
LIV) Other Non -establishment matters. [As shown in Annexure –II(a)] 
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
462 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure II (a)  
Points t o be seen –Non-establishment items common to all offices.  
I) Cash  Imprest  account  and contingent  expenditure  and accountal of 
items purchased.  
II) Miscellaneous  cash receipts  & its remittances to station earnings . 
III) Stamp  and Stationery account . 
IV) Uniform  & livery account . 
V) Check  of Inventory  and Dead  stock  including Tools  & Plants  & 
instruments etc.  
VI) Review of  stock  verification  sheets  etc. Departmental  verification  
sheets  etc. 
VII) Log books  and accounts  of petrol, di esel oil used for staff  cars, trolleys 
and other vehicles, including recovery of charges  for rental use of staff  
car. 
VIII) Indent for stores  and check of account  of consumable  stores  in tally 
books . Non  moving surplus  stores  reasons thereof.  
IX) Cases of thefts  and losses.  
X) Budget  liability  & fraud  register . 
XI) Staff  liability  register  in respect of responsibilities fixed . 
XII) Review of previous Audit  and Accounts  inspection  reports . 
XIII) Advice  note of returned stores . 
XIV)  Review of MTOs, pairing of issue  notes . 
XV) Review of policy  files relating to subject, issues noticed durin g 
voucher  audit  and noted in register  of points to be seen during 
inspection .  
XVI)  Accountal  of machine  numbered books . 
XVII)  Tour  note/Ins pection  Notes  of GM , HOD and other officers etc, 
Minutes  of conference  held.  
XVIII)  Register  of losses including damages  and deficiency.  
XIX)  Credit  Notes  & freight  bills. 
XX) Indents  issue  notes  & DS8s.  
XXI)  Arrangements of shift duty  for labour .  
XXII)  System  of payment of  wages  etc to labours, including witnessing of 
payments during the period of inspection   
XXIII)  Review of court  judgements , arbitration  cases, law  charges  if any.  
XXIV)  Important cases noticed during the inspection  of sub offices of named 
department or main office.  
XXV)  Review of reports /PCDO  or correspondence with controlling office to 
which performance  is reported  
XXVI)  Review of important policy  cases.  
XXVII)  Narrative  report & other periodical  reports  published by 
Department /HQ/Board . 
XXVIII)  Claims  register  & claim cases for goods  lost/damaged in transit.  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
463 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIX)  Handing  over notes  of Officers/Sr. subordinates.  
XXX)  Purchase  receipt  and installati on/commissioning  of machines , 
equipment  etc., and maintenance  thereof maintenance  contracts  etc. 
XXXI)  Review of pay  order books . 
XXXII)  Review of imprest  stores . 
XXXIII)  Review of contract  agreement, Contractor bills  and ledgers , cash  book 
etc. 
XXXIV)  Cases of local  purchases.  
XXXV)  Hiring  of building , staff  car etc.  
XXXVI)  Approved  list of contractors . 
XXXVII)  Review of surplus  stores /materials  and arrangements for disposal  
thereof.  
XXXVIII)  Splitting up of work  orders to avoid sanction by higher authorities . 
XXXIX)  Review of schedule  of rates etc.  
XL) Review of work  study report. Action taken on work  study repor ts. 
 
  
Chapter 12  – Audit of Mechanical Department  
 
464 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of Abbreviations  
Abbreviation  Full Form  
CRIS  Centre  for Railway  Information  System  
CWE  Chief  Workshop  Engineer  
CME  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  
DLW  Diesel  Locomotive  Workshop  
EDME  Executiv e Director  Mechanical  Engineering  
GM General  Manager  
IOH Intermediate  Over -Hauling  
M & P  Machinery  & Plants  
PH Plan Head  
PHoD  Principal  Head of the Department  
POH  Periodic Over  Hauling  
RDSO  Research  Design  & Standard  Organisation  
Dy. CEE  Deputy  Chief  Electrical  Engineer  
AEE  Assistant  Electrical  Engineer  
SSE Senior  Section  Engineer  
SPO Senior  Personnel  Officer  
APO  Assistant  Personnel  Officer  
Dy FA&CAO  Deputy  Financial  Adviser  and Chief  Accounts  Officer  
AFA  Assistant  Financial  Adviser  
CMM  Chief  Materials  Manager  
AMM  Assistant  Materials  Manager  
DMU  Diesel  Multiple  Unit 
EMU  Electric  Multiple  Unit 
COFMOW  Central  Organis ation  for Modernisation of Workshops  
WM Works  Manager  
AWM  Assistant  Works  Manager  
MLR  Midlife  Rehabilitation  
ETP Effluent  Treatment  Plant  
RSP Rolling  Stock  Programme  
IRCA  Indian  Railway  Conference Association  
CRS  Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  
CPCB  Central  Pollution  Control  Board  
SPCB  State Pollution  Control  Board  
OBHS  On board House  Keeping Services  
 
  
  Railway Audit Manual  
 
465 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
466 
For internal use of IA&AD    CHAPTER 13  - AUDIT OF PRODUCTION UNITS  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE PRODUCTION UNITS  
There are eight Railway  Production  units (PUs )- 
For the production  of Locomotives - i.e. Chittaranj an Locomotive  Works  (CLW )- 
Chittaranjan,West Bengal Banaras Locomotive Works (BLW) - Varanasi, Uttar 
Pradesh,( erstwhile DLW ) Diesel -Loco Modernisation Works  
(DMW ) in Patiala , Punjab  
For the production  of other Rolling  stock: -Integral Coach  Factory (ICF )- 
Chennai , Tamil Nadu Rail Coach Factory (RCF )- Kapurthala, Punjab, Modern 
Coach Factory (MCF )- Raibareli, UP and Rail Wheel  Factory (RWF) - 
Yehalanka, Bangalore,Karnataka, Rail Wheel Plant, Bela Saran,Bihar.  
The Office of the Director  General  of Audit  (DGA ), Railway  Production  Units - 
Kolkata  is responsible for audit of CLW  and BLW. The audit of ICF  and RWF is 
entrusted  to the Office of Director General  of Audit (DGA), Southern  Railway, 
Chennai . Whereas, audit of RCF , DMW  and MCF  is  being conducted by Office 
of the Director General of Audit, Northern  Railways , New Delhi . Audit of  Rail 
Wheel  Plant, Bela Saran, Bihar is entrusted to Office of the Principal  Director  of 
Audit, East Central  Railway, Hajipur . 
2. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AT RAILWAY BOARD 
LEVEL  
The Production  Units  at Railway  Board  level  is headed  by the Member  (Traction   
and Rolling  Stock )  and assisted by Executive  Directors and  Directors.  
3. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AT PRODUCTION UNIT 
(PU) LEVEL  
PUs are headed by General  Managers except DMW  & Rail Wheel  Plant where  
Chief  Administrative     Officer( Railways ) is head of the organization who are 
assisted by various principal head of  the departments  namely  PCME  (Mechanical  
Department),  PCEE (Electrical  Department, PCMM  (Stores  Department), PFA  
(Accounts  Department), PCPO  (Personnel  Department),  PCMO  (Medical  
Department),  PCE (Engineering  Department), CVO (Vigilance Department), 
CQAM (Chief Quality  Assurance  Manager ) and Security  Commissioner  etc. 
4. AUDIT PROCEDURE   
The procedure of Central  Audit  for Production  Units is the same as applicable to  
the other units as well as for Railway ’s workshops  and for Local Audit ; each  
production  unit has a different  manufacturing  orientation  and is not practicable  to 
prepare  common norms  except common activities.  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
467 
For internal use of IA&AD  As prescribed in the Indian Railway  Mechanical  code para no 1502, 1503 and 
1514, the ass essment of requirement and planning  for production  of locos and 
other Rolling  stocks was centralised  at Railway  Board .  Railway Board  prepared 
the production plan throu gh annual Rolling Stock  Programme  (RSP) for a period  
of three years in advance, and later realign the production plan according to the 
requirement. On the basis of Annual Production  Programme, final produc tion 
activities, stores procurement , deployment of man -power, etc are being 
considered at the Production Unit level, where the Audit  checks begin.   
During Audit  it should be seen that:  
I) Whether any justificat ion for new acquisition  of locomotives was being 
prepared in the field offices including Production  units?  
II) While fixing the targets whether achievement of the last year along with 
the constraints, if any  was conside red.  
III) While preparing the Annual Production  Programme  whether any changes 
or likely forthcoming changes were considered?  
IV) Whether the store procurements were done on the basis of said production  
target ? 
V) Whether the man -power deployment is synchronised with the Annual 
Production  Programme . 
Chapter II of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  relates to Production  Units . 
On the basis of Chapter II and other relevant chapters  of Indian Railways  Rolling 
Stock  Code and other codes  of Indian Railways, audit  checks  for Production 
Units of Indian Railways are as follows: - 
Estimates : - Chapter VII of Indian  Railways  Rolling  stock  Code  elaborates the 
necessity, format and e lements of estimates . The provisions of this chapter will 
not apply to the manufacture of Locomotive /Coaches  or furnishing work  
undertaken in Railway  Production  Units  against orders placed by the Board  for 
supply  to Railways . 
Detailed  estimates  for works  to be undertaken in Production  Unit should be 
prepared in the following cases: - 
I) All works  whether chargeable  wholly or in part to Capital  or to 
Depreciation  Reserve  Fund  or to Open  Line Works —Revenue  (including 
New  Minor  Works) and works  of a special  nature, such as special  
overhauls  of rolling -stock  even though chargeable to ordinary revenue.  
II) Works  undertaken for outsiders (including those for Home Line  
Employees ), other Railways  and other Government  Departments  or 
Ministries.  
The audit  of estimates  sanctioned  during a particular month  should be completed 
by the end of the following  month . The  selection of estimates  for audit should be 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
468 
For internal use of IA&AD  made by the Branch  officer of the section  from the register  of estimates  
maintained in the Accounts  Office  and particulars of the selected estimates  should 
be entered in a separate register  in the Audit  Office. While conducting audit of 
estimates , Chapter VII of Indian  Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code  should also be 
seen.   
Estimates  should show in de tail, as far as possible, different kinds and quantities 
of stores  required for the work  in the different shops  and the cost  of labour  in 
each shop . This is especially neces sary to prevent more stores  than are necessary 
for a particular work  being indented for and being used without authority , on 
other work . It should be seen that estimates  of probab le credits  to revenue for 
material  to be released from the breaking up of the replaced stock  vide paragraph  
707-711 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  and in respect of rolling stock  
removed from the authorized list without replacement , are properly prepared and 
sanctioned  by competent  authority  before the condemned  rolling stock  is actually 
broken up  (See Chapter - VII and Chapter - X of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  
Code).   
In reviewing the estimates  along with contracts  etc. it should be especially seen 
that all the contracts  are in conformity with the estimates , the following points 
may also be looked into in the initial stage itself in course of audit  of sanctions  to 
estimates , review of annual  works  programme , review of major  works  etc. 
I) The propriety  of justification  for the expenditure  that is proposed to be 
incurred.  
II) The incidence  and classification  or allocation  of the charges  
III) The existence of the sanction of competent  authority  
IV) The cost  of the estimate  is not unduly inflated  
In auditing  the estimates  for saloons  it may be ascertained whether (I) in the case 
of saloons  for other Government  departments  the conditions regarding payment 
of in terest , depreciation  and maintenance  charges  have been accepted by the 
departments concerned; and (2) in the case of saloons  for private  parties the 
necessary funds have been deposited beforehand.   
The instructions  for the audit  of estimates  for saloons  apply mutatis mutandis  to 
the audit of estimates  for vehicles constructed for the Posts  and Telegraphs 
Department  vide Paragraphs  723-725 of Indian  Railway  Rolling  stock  code. 
Estimates  for inspection  carriage and saloon carriages  for railway  officials may 
be scrutinized to see if their construction  appears justifiable. For example, it 
should be unnecessary to build separate saloons  for officers who are not expected 
to travel frequently. Under  extant  orders of the Railway Board , no proposals for 
new saloons  and reserved carriages  will be considered until the Board  are 
convinced that the number in use has been redu ced to the absolute minimum 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
469 
For internal use of IA&AD  required for systematic and frequent inspections  to ensure safety  and the efficient 
conduct of railway  work .  
Work  Orders : - A work  order is an order planned on the shops  to put certain 
work  in hand . These orders numbered in the manner indicated in Paras 743-751 
of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  and all stores  and labour  utilized in 
execution  of a particula r work  are allocated to the work  order concerned. System  
of Work orders its necessity and essential features  are also mentioned under 
Paras, Para 741-742 of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code   
During Audit  it should be seen that: - 
I) No work  should be issued without sanction  of competent  authority ; 
II) Before issue  of work  order availability of proper sanctioned  estimate  and 
funds are essential. The sanctioned  estimate for the work  is required 
sufficient details i.e. description of the labour  to be employed, the various 
kinds of stores  required, the shops  in which items are to be manufactured, 
the percentage  of over heads to levied and the deposits if any to scrutinise 
the cost  of the finished article.  
III) That all work  orders should be recorded in a register  showing the all 
details with the date of iss ue of work  order, the date of commencement 
and of the completion  of the work . 
IV) That the correctness of allocation  of labour  and stores  and all charge s 
should be checked with subsidiary  record.  
V) That there is no credit  outlay  outstanding  on work  order.  
In scrutinizing work  orders relating to pri vate jobs, the following points should 
be borne in mind: -  
The estimated cost  of the works  is deposited with a promise to pay  on demand 
any excess expenditure  vide paragraph  712 to 714  of Indian  Railway  Rolling  
Stock  Code  or reco veries  are effected through  pay bills. It should be seen that 
there is compliance  (without undue  delay) with these instructions . If the 
permanent  staff have standing work  orders authorising them to draw consumable  
stores  such as coal, coke and firewood from the shops , it should be seen that 
requisitions for those mater ials are promptly brought to account  and deductions 
are made monthly  through pay  sheets .  
Completion  Reports - The instructions  laid down in paragraph  226 and 781 to 
785 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  apply to completion  reports  of works  
done in the workshops  and Production  Units . It should be remembered 
particularly that any alteration in the type or number of rolling stocks constitutes 
a material  modification  and requires the sanction of the Railway  Board  even 
though there may be no excess over the amount of the sanctioned  estimates  vide 
paragraph  1109 -E, While auditing  the completion  reports of saloons /Coaches  for 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
470 
For internal use of IA&AD  other Government  departments  and Postal  vehicles, it should be seen that the 
capital  cost is correctly entered in the register  maintained for the purpose of 
calculating the half -yearly or yearly interest  recoverable  from the Government 
departments concerned.   
Workshop  Accounts -The cost  of work  undertaken in the Production  Unit for 
Railway ’s itself the elemen ts may be taken in accordance with Para 212 and 757 
of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code . If works  undertaken for other than 
Railway, Profit  and departmental  charges  etc. will be added  in accordance with 
Para 712 to 715 of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code.  
Muster  Roll cum Labour  Pay Sheet  -Chapter III Para  331-32 of Indian  
Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code . Accounts  of Labour employed should be 
maintained in the workshops  in two series; one for the purpose  of payment and 
the othe r for the allocation  of labour  charges  to the jobs  upon which the workmen 
are employed.  
As per Revised  Audit  Norms  (March 2003), central  audit  of Muster  Roll cum 
Labour  Pay Sheet  on monthly  basis has been dispense with .The audit  of Muster 
Roll and Labour Pay Sheets to be done du ring inspection  of  concerned shops  by 
selecting one month ’s vouchers . During inspection it may be seen without 
previous notice there is no fictitious  name in the muster  roll.  
Important initial documents  in connection with labour  charges  are (l) absentee 
statements; (2) Gate  attendance  cards ; (3) time  sheets ; (4) muster  rolls and labour  
paysheets; and (5) overtime  sheets . During inspection , it should be see that the 
method of booking  labour  against various works  is correct and that initial records 
are correctly maintained. It will also be seen that there is a proper system  of 
recording labourers entering the shops , that a list  of absentees in various shops  is 
prepared daily from such record, that a list of absentees is prepared by the Sr. 
Section  Engineer  (SSE )  or other responsible official from an actual inspection of  
the labour  employed and that these two lists of absentees are tallied with each 
other. The accuracy  of the time  sheets  may be verified by actual count during 
such visits. It is fundamental that s uch a procedure is laid  down for check of 
muster  rolls and the payment of wages  to ensure that the responsibility of each 
individual can be definitely allocated after the event, that there are adequate 
counter -checks, that the functions  of preparing and checking the bills  are 
allocated independently from the functions of dealing in cash  and making 
payments, and that the staff  concerned are cha nged from time  to time . 
Gate  Attendance  Cards  should be examined with reference to Gate Passes , 
absentee statements, overtime  requisition etc. The parti culars of leave , recorded 
in the Gate Attendance Card  should be verified with reference to the postings in 
the leave  registers . 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
471 
For internal use of IA&AD  It should be seen that the total time  shown in the time  sheets /job cards  are agreed 
with the muster  rolls by the time  office and that the monthly  aggregate of hours 
and days in the time  sheets  of ea ch shop  is reconciled with the total of the Muster  
Rolls/ gate attendance  cards  for that shop . Small differences due to the calculation 
of wages  by the mont h in the muster  rolls and by hours and days in the time  sheets  
may be ignored. But if these differences are appreciable, it should be seen that 
steps are taken to ascertain the real reasons for the d ifference. The rates of pay  
shown in the muster  rolls should be compared with those shown in the time  
sheets . They may also be compared with the rates shown in the previous month 's 
muster  rolls and the differences should be checked with reference to the 
engagement  sheets , dismissal sheets , promotion  lists, reduction lists, etc. The 
accuracy  of number of days, gross amount, deductions (provident  fund, etc.) and 
the net amount should also be checked.   
The rate  of pay  shown in the muster  sheets  should also be ‘checked with t he scale 
of wages  laid down by competent  authority  (See Chapter III of Indian  Railways  
Rolling  Stock  Code ). In all the Production  Units , labour  pay-sheets  of the 
workshop staff  are prepared on the computer  by the same system  as for pay  roll 
preparation for other staff . The instructions  regarding audit  of computerized  pay 
bills will, therefore, apply to the check of computer printed  labour  pay-sheets  
also. If any labour  is employed temporarily outside the sh ops, it should be seen 
that a prescribed  form of duty  certificate  under the signature  of competent 
authority  is furnished to the time  office showing the days and hours of absence 
from the shop  and the work  order, on which it was engaged and that the work  
order concerned is debited  with the wages  due. 
Overtime  bills should be examined to see that the allowances  are covered  by 
rules . The system  of overtime  in vogue may be examined to see that it is 
consistent with effic iency  and economy . The overtime  sanctioned  does not 
contravene either the Factory  Act or the Hours  of Employment  Regulations  or 
any other such regulations  in force at the time . 
Where facility of Workmen 's trains  is available it should  be generally seen that 
the train run  punctually to time  as the late  arrival of such trains  frequently will 
mean subs tantial loss  of working  time in the Railway  workshops . 
Instances in which both overtime  and Night  Duty  Allowance  are drawn shoul d 
be scrutinized as to the authority , frequency  and duration.  
It may also be checked that necessary deductions regarding House  rent, Electric  
charges , provident  recoveries  and deduction on account  of various advances  have 
been made correctly from the staff  concerned. All the arithmetical  calculations 
includ ing the totals are correct. In case of staff  who either attend workshop late  
by half an hour on private  account , the period is regulated through the deduction 
of wages  or grant  of leave . Necessary certificate  regarding the checking of 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
472 
For internal use of IA&AD  deductible absence, overtime , rates of pay  and allowances  have been recorded by 
the Time Booking  Clerks  and Clerks of the pay  bill section  of the Works  
Managers  office in the summary page of each labour  sheet. Total number of men 
charged in the Muster  Sheet  is not in excess of the sanctioned  strength . The 
allocation  is correct of labour  charged is correctly mentioned.  
Bonus  and piece  work bills- In 4 PUs  i.e. RCF , MCF , DMW  and RWF , Group  
Incentive  Scheme  (GIS ) is applicable and under GIS  no Time  sheet/Tally  sheet 
as well as root card etc. are maintained.  In CLW , DLW  and ICF , Chittranjan  
pattern incentive  scheme is applicable. For audit  of bills relating to these schemes, 
the whole field may be divided into suitable units  keeping in view the extent of 
check prescribed  and one unit  selected each month . The units may be  so drawn 
as to contain a reasonable number of direct  workers , indirect  workers  and 
supervisors . In addition to the monthly  check, a general review of the r ecords 
maintained in the incentive  branch of the accounts  office should be undertaken 
yearly to examine the system  of fixation  of allowed time , change in productivity  
due to incentive  scheme, incidents of overtime  in conjunction with each increase 
in bonus  payment etc. The initial documents  (such as gate  attendance  cards , job 
cards , squad summary cards  and idle time  cards ) should be audited  to the extent 
possible. In checking piece  work  time sheets  the following points should be seen 
(vide Chapter IV of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code )- 
I) The details of actual time  spent, wages  and profit  earned, and the rate  
fixed  for the job are furnished in piece -workers  statements to enable a 
check to be exercised over the corr ectness of profits  distributed;  
II) Where the piece -work  system  results in a loss , the procedure outlined in 
paras  416 to 420 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  is observed. 
Where the loss  ‘is not recovered owing to its falling in a subsequent wage 
period, the desirability of avoiding it by revising the system  of profits  
suitably, may be suggested to the Administration .  
III) It should be seen that the piece  work  rates are reviewed at intervals  by a 
competent  authority  to see whether they are reasonable and the 
conclusions drawn in such reviews may be test checked.  
Incentive  Bills  (Chapter IV of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code ) 
The incentive  bills are prepared in two categories  
I) Incentive  bills of Direct  workers   
II) Incentive  bills of Indirect  workers  
The incentive  bonus  bills are printed  on the computer  shop -wise showing ticket 
No., shop  and section  code, time  taken, time  saved or lost , amount saved or lost 
and the amount payable. The number of hours worked, the average  percentage  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
473 
For internal use of IA&AD  earned,  the number of hours earned, the rate  and the total amount earned. The 
details of employee category, Shop  No., and total ‘allowed time ' are available in 
a separate statement called "Ticket -wise tabulation  for the month ". Wherever the 
'ticket -wise tabulation ' or Details of Job  Cards statement' is comprehensive and 
contains the details of amount payable, setup time , proceeding time  and ‘allowed 
time' for each unit , audit  scrutiny may be restricted merely to the agreement of 
entries in the statement with the information on the job cards , arithmetical  check 
on accuracy  of calculations being restricted to 50% of the transactions selected 
for audit.  
The audit  of incentive  bills both for direct  and indirect  workers  should 
be supplemented by a periodical  review of the action  taken on error  statement 
produced on the computer  as below - 
I) The reconciliation  statement printed  in respect of direct  workers  should 
be checked once a quarter to see that errors  have been correctly rectified 
particularly in respect of losses.  
II) The action  taken on the statement of cards  printed  in the processing of 
essential indirect  workers  incentive  bills, which shows cases of essential 
indirect  workers  not prima facie employed in the incentive  sections, 
should be reviewed every month . 
III) Similarly, the statement "GA Hours  Reconciliation -Details for un -
reconciled ticket numbers" should be  reviewed and the correctness of 
action  taken thereon should be test checked during audit . 
IV) The statement of Abnormal Profits and Losses, which shows all cases of 
profits . 
V) Exceeding 50% and all cases of losses sh ould be reviewed for the year to 
see that remedial  action  is taken to revise the "allowed time ".  
Group  Incentive  Scheme  
The above mentioned checks  are relating to Piece work  Incentive  bonus  system . 
In the Group  Incentive Scheme  (GIS ) the product is defined into group wise 
different set of activit ies. The calculation of incentive  is done on the basis of 
output  of set of activities by whole group. In the GIS there is no system  to 
maintain the Job  Card , Time sheet, Tally  sheet and Root card etc. Further, in the 
GIS there is no provision to book the idle time  except failure  of electricity more 
than an hour.  
During audit  of bill relating to GIS  it should be seen t hat the output  of product is 
correctly mentioned and calculation is correctly made on the basis of time  fix for 
an activity. Proper  time study for group activity was carried out and is available 
in re cord. Whether on receipt  of modern/latest machines  and plant the time  
allowed of activities have been modified?  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
474 
For internal use of IA&AD  The introduction of bonus  system  should normally result in increased outturn  and 
reduce the cost  per unit  of outturn . Where this is not so, it may be necessary to 
seek for a justification  of the system  by a reference to the admini strative 
authorities  
Labour  Sub-ledger :-Labour Sub -ledger  (Chapter V of Indian  Railway  Rolling  
Stock  Code ) is summary of the total amount against each work  order shown in 
various timesheets of each shop . The object of checking the labour  sub-ledger  is 
to ensure accuracy  of the evaluation  of time  spent on work  orders, levy  of 
overheads and ultimately posting into the Workshop  General  Register .  
The Labour  tabulations  printed  on the computer  to serve the purpose of labour  
sub-ledger , is a summary sta tement giving for each work  order, series of work  
order and shop , the costing  hours, incentive  amount, costing amount and factory  
and Administrative  over-heads. This does not indicate the worker -wise details 
leading to the total labour  charges  on a particular work  for which an intermediate 
printout should be obtained from the Railway  Admi nistrations who have been 
advised by the Railway Board  to comply with the requirement of Audit . This 
intermediate print -out will facilitate  of the relevant entries with reference to time -
sheets  and checking that the time  spent has been correctly evaluated at the ruling 
average  rate and in addition that the over -heads had been correctly evaluated. 
However, as the time /tally sheets  do not give proceeding time , the labour  sub-
ledger  may be checked with reference to job -cards  also in the case of incentive  
sections.   
The statement "details  of labour  charges " generated on computer , which gives 
details of work  order in respect of each labour  charges , prima -facie 
misclassification should be scrutinised in audit  every month  with a view to 
examining the reasons for misclassifications and the action  taken to rectify it.  
Unpaid  Wages  and Clearance Certificate  (Para 324-W to para 333 -W) (Para 
1959 of Chapter XIX of Indian  Railway  Accounts  Code  Vol- I) On payment  being 
completed, the payment clerk and the Junior  Engineer  (JE) maki ng payment 
should check the unclaimed envelopes (or boxes) in their possession with the 
muster  roll-cum-Labour  Pay Sheet  and the Junior Engineer (JE) should enter in 
ink again st the numbers concerned the words "Not paid" under his dated initials. 
A certificate  should then be given by the payment clerk and Junior Engineer  (JE) 
on the summary page of the muster  roll-cum-Labour Pay S heet.  
The envelopes (or boxes) left undelivered should be emptied and their amount 
made over to the cash  office clerk who should immediately enter the same in the 
Cash  Book (W. 306 ) (Para 1911 of Indian  Railway  Accounts  Code  Vol-I) under 
the appropriate  column in the presence of the payment clerk and initial the 
amount. A m iscellaneous  Receipt  Transmit Note  (A-I 1605 ) for the total amount 
returned by all the payment clerks should be made out immediately  and sent to 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
475 
For internal use of IA&AD  the cashier. If the amount of unclaimed pay  envelopes cannot, due to some special  
reasons, be returned to the cash  office clerk on the day of payment, it should be 
sent to the cashie r on the following day accompanied by the Miscellaneous  
Receipt Transmit Note ( A-I 1605 ). 
Each payment clerk should prepare lists of the men of each shop  not paid i.e. 
unpaid  wages  lists ( A 1959 ), in triplicate, by carbon process, post  columns 8, 10 
and 11 of the Cash  Book  (A-1911 and A -1917 ) in respect  of his batch  and record 
the accountal of the money received by him on the summary page or e ach muster  
roll-cum-Labour  Pay Sheet .  
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) The unpaid  wages  lists are correctly prepared and that the par ticulars 
shown in the list agree with those shown in the bills  
II) All the unpaid  items in the bills  are brought on to the lists and noted in the 
Register  of unpaid  wages . 
III) There has been no undue  delay on the part of the pay  clerks to lodge the 
amoun  ts with the cahier or the Bank  
IV) The amounts thus lodged are correctly brought to account  in the Daily  
Abstra ct of cash  transactions an d credited  to Deposits  unpaid  wages  in 
the General  Books  and 
Subsequent payment  are  made to  the  correc t  parties and that  such repayments  
are  promptly  noted in the Register  of unpaid  wages  and duly attested by a 
gazetted  officer or senior accountant to avoid the risk  of a doubl e payment.  
Note: - After implementation  of 100% on line  payment system  i.e. through 
NEFT /RTGS  etc. to labours/staff  there is no scope  of unpaid  wages . However, 
where such system  not implemented these checks  remain unchanged.  
Stores -Materials  required in the Production  Unit are genera lly obtained either 
from open trade or through the Stores Department  of railway  concerned and 
similarly articles  manufactured in the shops  are passed on to the Stores 
Department for custody and issue . Procedure  for receipt  and issue  of material  in 
Production Units  are mentioned under Para 501 to 530  of Indian  Railways  Rolling  
Stock  Code  may also be kept in view. The important records are:  
I) Requisition  or issue  tickets ; 
II) Issue  notes ;  
III) Daily  summaries ;  
IV) Monthly  summaries ;  
V) Stores  sub-ledgers  ; and  
VI) Outturn  statements.  
In checking requisitions, it should be seen that proper description of material , 
quantity, unit  and work  order number etc. mentioned on requisitions slip  they are 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
476 
For internal use of IA&AD  signed by a responsible officer and that requisitions complied with, are duly 
acknowledged by the receiving officer. The issue  notes  should be compared with 
the requisitions to see that supplies are made according to  requisition slip and not 
made in excess of the quantity required nor charged for in excess of supplies. In 
checking the issue  notes  it should be seen that they do not contain unusual  items 
of charges  and are not wrongly allocated, that the pricing of materials  is correct 
and that the materials  drawn are correctly debit able to the work  order concerned.  
It should be seen that the copy of the iss ue note received direct  from the shop  is 
paired with the priced copy received in support  of the daily summary of issues 
from the Stores  Accounts  Office  vide paragraph  Para 215 and Para 507 -508 of 
Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code , and that the  allocation  to work  orders is 
correct. When the stores  copy of the issue  note is not received with the 
departmental  summaries , the pairing of the Sr. Section  Engineer  (SSE )’s copy 
with the entry in the departmen tal summary should be done. Similarly, it should 
be seen that the monthly  summaries  of issues of stores  received from the Store 
Accounts Office agree with the total of the daily summarie s of issues before they 
are returned duly accepted. The total stores  issued against a work  order should be 
tallied without turn statement.  
Advice  Notes  of Returned  Stores  (Para 1539 -S):-The procedure prescribed  for 
returned stores  to Stores Depots  and accounting f or the same should be generally 
examined. In checking the advice notes  of Returned Stores  the following points 
require special  attention -  
I) The stores  returned should be promptly acknowled ged by the Stores  
Department .  
II) Quantity acknowledged must tally with the quantity returned.  
III) The correctness of the allocation  of the credit  should be checked.   
IV) The rate  at whi ch credit  is afforded should be reasonable.  
V) Cases in which the valuation  of Returned  Stores  by the returning 
department differs greatly from that given by the Stores Department  
should be investigated and the reasons for the difference examined to see 
how it was reconciled ( Para 507 to 508 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  
Code ). 
Stores  sub-ledger - The value of stores  allocated to various work  orders is 
abstracted shop -wise in the stores  sub-ledger  (Para 510 of Indian  Railways  
Rollin g Stock  Code ). The check of stores  sub-ledger  is intended to ensure the 
correctness of the store  debits /credits  and their allocat ion to the work  orders. 
Under  the computerized  system  ‘Stores Tabulations ' showing voucher -wise 
amount of stores  issued, stores  over-held for each work  order, replaced the stores  
sub-ledger . The vouchers  selected for audit  should be traced into the machine  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
477 
For internal use of IA&AD  prepared ‘stores  tabulation ’. The arithmetical  check of the valuation  of the stores  
voucher  may also be test checked.  
Miscellaneous  sub-ledger - Besides the labour  and stores  charges , certain 
miscellaneous  charges  e.g. Municipal  taxes , water  charges , cost of electric  
current , carriage of materials  etc., are debited  to relevant work  orders and 
abstracted in Miscellaneous stores  sub-ledger  (Para 525 of Indian  Railways  
Rolling  Stock  Code ) mai ntained for each shop  separately. The vouchers  relating 
to payments for such items as selected for audit  should, in addition to being traced 
into cash  book and journal , be traced int o the Miscellaneous sub -ledger , as the 
latter has to be referred to while checking the Workshop  Account  Current .  
Overheads : - Besides direct  expenditure  on labour  and materials  incurred on a 
product, there are certain expenditure  which cannot be directly charged to product 
but included in the cost  of production  on certain equitable  basis. This indirect  
expenditure  is termed in production units  as overheads. Thus, o ver heads are 
important elements relating to costing  of a prod uct and Codal  procedure for 
bifurcation, booking  and calculation of overheads in a Railway  Production  unit 
is mentioned under Para 220 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  and Paras  
619 of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code  . The overheads in a production unit  
are classified  on commercial  pattern into  four categories to ensure proper control  
and equitable  distribution  of indirect  expenses  on cost  of production. These are 
as under: - 
I) Factory  overhead  
II) Administrative  overhead  
III) Township  overhead  
IV) Stores  overhead  
Separate  standing work  orders are issued for collection of overhead expenditure  
in respect of each of the above classification . For facility of collection, analysis  
and control  of overheads falling under the above categories, separate expense 
numbers are allotte d. The vouchers  containing a charge to overhead expenses  
should bear the appropriate  allocation  as under:  
Factory  Overhead. —This should generally comprise of (a) All i ndirect  expenses  
of production  shops . (b) All indirect  expenses  of production -cum-service  
shops .(c) Expenses of Apprentices  attached to main shops .(d) Expenses of Dy.  
CME (W)/Work  Manager 's office including planning  and progress, preplanning, 
estimating etc. offices. (e) Ex penses of time  keeping organization . (f) Expenses 
of works  canteens  including meal sheds . (g) Depreciation  of Building, Plant  and 
Machinery  of shops  and Departments  mentioned above. (h) Electric  charges  
consumed by departments  and shops  mentioned above. (i) Credit  for return of 
materials , interest  and profit  earned for works  done for outsiders etc.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
478 
For internal use of IA&AD  Administrative  Overheads .—These include: (a)Expenses of General  Managers  
office and other general administrative offices.(b) Electric  charges  concerned by 
the various offices included in (a) above.(c) Credits on account  of return of 
mate rials, diet charges  etc. 
Township  Overheads :— These comprise of (a) Expenses of civil engineering  
Department . (b) Expenses of water  works, sanitation , horticulture etc.(c) 
Electricity  consumed by the above departments  and township.(d) Depreciation  of 
Buildings , Plant  and Equipment  etc. of above Departments  and Township.(e) 
Credit  for recovery of house  rent, electricity and water charges  from staff  and 
outsiders and return of m aterials  etc. by the Departments mentioned above.  
Stores  Overheads .— these comprise of —(a) Cost of stores  department in 
headquarter  or elsewhere.(b) Depreciation  of buildings  and equipment  of the 
various stores  offices/  Departments . (c) Inland handling and freight  charges  not 
allocated to stores  directly.(d) Clearance from Stock  Adjustment  Account .(e) 
Cost of pattern supplied by the Administration  to suppliers  as per agreement.(f) 
Cost of replacement  and rectification of defective and deficient materials  supplied 
by the stores  departments  and not recoverable  from Firms.(g) Credit  for return of 
materials  allocable to stores  Departments  and for incidental, freight  and 
departmental  charges  realized on sales . 
Allocation  and Apportionm ent.—Overhead expenses  are allocated to 
departments  or cost  centers responsible for the expense as far as practicable. Such 
of the expenses  which cannot be conveniently  allocated to the responsible or 
chargeable  cost centers in the first instance, are allocated to incurring 
Departments  for apportionment  to the departments/cost  centers i n proportion to 
services rendered.  
The factory , Administrative  and Township  overheads are levied on production  
jobs on 'Direct  Wages ' (excl uding Incentive  Bonus ). The percentages of Factory  
overhead are worked out each for Administrative and Township overheads. A 
single percentage  rate is also worked out for store s overheads for levy  on 'direct  
stores '. 
 During its Audit , It should be seen whether the overheads are accurately 
distributed according to the codal  principles  and all the necessary items of on cost  
charges  have been duly taken into account  and no item of charge which can be 
allocated to a specific job has been included in ‘overhead’. It may be useful to 
see whether the proportions fixed  for the distribution  of on cost  charges  to the 
various jobs /shops  are reviewed periodically. It may also be seen whether any 
unusual  item of charge has been included in arriving at the overhead charges . The 
relevant records maintained in Accounts  Office  to collect together the actual on 
cost charges  will be test checked to ensure that it is correctly complied. It may 
also be seen that the review of overheads ( Para 222-23 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
479 
For internal use of IA&AD  Stock  Code ) is being carried out and overcharges  and under charges  (Para 786  of 
Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code) are being adjusted.  
Cost Accounts  and Job  costing  sheets - In the production  units ; cost  accounting 
systems have been introduced to enable the administration to know the cost  of 
each operation  in the workshops  and of each ar ticle manufactured or repaired 
therein. The accounts  procedure followed in each Production  Unit should be 
scrutinized in detail to see that correct principles  are followed and especially t hat 
the calculation of on -cost is correctly made. It may sometimes happens that for 
the manufacture of Coaches /locomotives , certain component/parts have to be 
obtained in a finished or semi -finished state  from outside sources or from other 
workshops /Production Units . The cost  at which such articles  should be taken into 
account  and the indirect  charges  to be levied in such cases should be scrutinized 
carefully.  
If it is found that the cost  of manufacture of a certain article in the Production  
Unit/workshop is much higher than its cost  in the open market, the question of 
bringing the facts officially to the notice of the administration should be carefully 
considered. The matter may be discussed by the Senior  Audit  Officer/Audit 
Officer with a responsible Production Unit/workshop or Stores  official and it 
should be ascertained whether any question of policy  is involved. It may, for 
example, be advantageous to have articles  manufactured in the Production 
Unit/workshops  in slack season s, even though the cost  as shown by the cost  
accounts  exceeds the rate  at which the art icle can be obtained elsewhere.  
While a system  of cost  accounting is almost an essential requisite of a Production  
Unit, it may sometimes be elaborated to such an extent as to result in considerably 
increased expenditure  on accounting. The total cost  incurred in such accounting 
procedure may, therefore, be compared occasionally with the total costs of 
operations  in the workshops , and with similar ratios in other workshops  to see 
that it does n ot become unduly disproportionate.  
It should be seen that a reconciliation  of cost  sheets  with financial  accounts  is 
carried out efficiently (vide paragraph  629 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  
Code ). On completion  of each batch  order  where cost  sheets  have been 
computerized , a statement "cost  analysis  for the batch  order completed" is printed  
on the computer . 
The print out should be reviewed in audit  in respect of month  to the extent 
prescribed  in the programme  of Audit  and this review shoul d be supplemented 
by a further review of the Materials  Analysis  Statement and Shop -wise/Series -
wise totals for WMS  Cards . The comparative statement of utilization of man 
hours for th e month  prepared manually" should also be scrutinized.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
480 
For internal use of IA&AD  Manufacture  Accounts -In checking these accounts  it should be seen that the 
following rules  in Chapter II  and VII of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  Code  are 
generally observed: - 
I) that there is a correct and reliable record of the labour  booked, quantity of 
materials  received and overheads on a work  order;  
II) that there is a proper record of the quantity of product manufactured and 
passed for serviceable and unserviceable  separately, and of wastage, and 
that a responsible officer scrutinises periodically the ratio  of serviceable 
to total outrun and of waste  to entire material  used; if there is evidence of 
undue  loss or waste  this may be brought to his notice and discussed with 
him; and   
III) that waste  products are utilised or properly disposed of, proper accounts  
being maintained for this purpose.  
It should be seen that there is a proper system  of transmitting all manufactured 
articles  to the  Stores  department on which devolve the duties of custody and 
distribution  of these articles . Even if the articles  are issued direct  to works  the 
transaction s should pass rough the Stores Accounts . 
It may occasionally be useful to compare the percentage  of wastage in the shops  
with the percentages of similar product of other Production  Unit for different 
periods. A study of relation between quantities or weights of raw materials  and 
finished products may also be useful. In all these cases, the question should be 
discussed by the Senior  Audit  Officer/Audit Officer concerned with the 
responsible workshop official before objection is raised.  
Workshop  General  Register  :- Para 225 and Para 755  of Indian  Railways  
Rolling  Stock Code  of  describes about Workshop General Register , whereas Para 
756 of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code stated work  order wise compilation  
of all charges  relating to a product. The Labour  and Stores  Sub-ledgers  having 
been totalled , the totals, of (a) Labour charges  and (b) Stores and Miscellaneous  
charges , for the month  relating to each work -order should be transferred to 
Worksh op General Register and posted under the relevant work -orders, shop  by 
shop , care being taken to see that no item is left out in posting.  
During its Audit , it should be seen that:  
I) The register  is correctly posted and all the details given in form M 755  of 
Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock Code  have been furnished.  
II) The postings under each work  order from the sub -ledgers  and other  
vouchers  are correct.  
III) That the indirect  charges  have been correctly worked out.  
IV) All the items are current  and have been undertaken after the issue  of a 
proper work  order, under the sanction of a competent  authority . There are 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
481 
For internal use of IA&AD  no credit  items in the detail of balance  and if there are any such items, 
they are noted for immediate adjustment.  
V) In the case of jobs  undertaken for outsiders, a sufficient deposit  has been 
made, wh ere such a deposit is required by rules , and on the first 
appearance of a work  it is seen that an estimate  is on record, containing 
the extra percentage  charges  required under t he rules , and accepted by the 
party ordering the work .  
VI) There are no inefficient balances and the periodical  adjustments  in respect 
of "overcharges  and undercharges" unde r the on  cost, manufacture and 
repair work  orders are carried out regularly and the outstanding  are not 
allowed to accumulate . 
In the case of computerized  tabulations , it should be seen that simultaneously 
with the posting to Workshop  General  Register , the stores  and labour  charges  
together with on cost / overheads thereon (but excluding direct  man-hours) as 
available in various tabulations  are posted independently in the check -sheet for 
each work  order in the same detail as in the Workshop General Register .  On 
completion  of posting, the totals for the month  are struck for each work  order 
under different element of cost  and reconciled with those appearing in the 
Workshop General  Register to ensure correctness  of the postings.  
It is also to be seen that the balances of Workshop  General  Register  are reconciled 
every month  with the balances of the out -turn statements.  
Out-turn Statement : - The procedure for preparation and compilation  of Out 
Turn Statement is depicted in Para 758-767 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  
Code . 
During its Audit , it should be seen that the postings in the out turn statement of 
the charges  for the month  against each work  order should be compared with those 
in the check sheets . This comparison  will bring out errors , if any, in the posting 
of the Worksho p General  Register  also of the outturn  statement which should be 
investigated and rectified.  
In the audit  of outturn  statement, it should be seen that the adjus tment of outlay  
is effected monthly  or on completion  in accordance with the rules  on the subject. 
The unadjusted items of expenditure  should be scrutinized to see that ther e are no 
minus balances, there is no outlay  on jobs  prior to issue  of work  orders, there is 
no outlay  on jobs  prior to issue  of work  orders, there  are no completed jobs  
outstanding  for long and outlay  on works  for which no estimates  have been 
sanctioned  is held under objection.  
Workshop  Account  Current :-An Account Current  of the transactions 
pertaining to "Workshop Manufacture  Suspense  Account" for each workshop 
should be prepared monthly  in Form M 769  of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
482 
For internal use of IA&AD  Code . This ac count  should show the total debits  and credits  to the Workshop 
Manufacture Suspense  Account under the heads provided in the form, and the 
opening and closing balances. D etail and method of preparation of Workshop 
Account current  is given in Para 769-770 and 778 -780 of Indian Railways  Rolling 
Stock  Code . During the course o f audit  the opening balance  should be checked 
with the closing balance  of the previous month , the posting under each head  both 
on debit  and credit  side should be checked with the supporting schedules. The 
arithmetical  accuracy  should be checked. It should be seen that the advices 
received from the accou nts office have been incorporated in the accounts , and the 
closing balance  should be analysed to see that the items are current  and there is 
no old outstanding . 
Workshop  Subsidiary  Balance Register : Para 775 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  
Stock  Code  stated that t he balance  under each of the suspense  heads operated 
upon in the Workshop Accounts  Office  (e.g. Workshop  Manufacture  Suspense  
Account , Labour  Suspense Account and Development  Suspense Account) should 
be reconciled and proved with the General  Books  every month . For this purpose 
a subsidiary  register  should be maintained, in which opening balances, debits  and 
credits  during the month  and the closing balan ces should be shown. The debits 
and credits  should be posted from the Journal  (A- 1107 ). The  correctness of the 
balances in this register  should be certified by  the Books Section . Any 
discrepancy found as a result of this reconciliation  should be promptly 
investigated and the Subsidiary Balance Register ( Para 775  of Indian Railways  
Rolling Stock  Code ) together with the result of reconciliation, put up to the 
Workshop Accounts Officer within 10 days of the close of the  Accounts for the 
month . During audit  it should be ensure that the proper procedure is being 
followed.  
Labour  Book. —For the purpose of recording details of the outstanding  balance  
under the suspense  head  'Labour' and for effecting a reconciliation  with the 
General  Books , a register  Labour Book ( Para 776 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  
Stock  Code ) showing the opening balance , credits  during the month , debits  
during the month  and the closing balance  under 'Labour Suspense ' should be 
maintained. This register  should be posted by individual bills . During audit  it 
should be seen that the Labour Book is being maintained and reconciled with 
booking  of labour . 
Reconciliation with the General  Books —Para 777 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  
Stock  Code  provides the procedure of reconciliation  the balance  under 'Workshop  
Manufacture  Suspense  Account ' and 'Labour  Suspense', app earing in the 
Account —Current  (Para 769 -770 of Indian Railways  Rolling Stock  Code  and the 
Labour B ook ( Para 776  of Indian Railways Rolling Stock Code) respectively with 
the corresponding balances shown in the Workshop Balance Register  (Para 775  
of Indian Railways Rolling Stock Code) and  later with the General B ooks. The 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
483 
For internal use of IA&AD  differences between the two sets of figures should be analysed and a Discrepancy  
Statement should be prepared in Form M 777 . The discrepancies should be 
investigated and necessary adjustments  carried out to clear them. Special  
attention should be paid to old discrepancies. The Discrepancy Statement 
together with the Account Current  and the Labour Book should be put up to the 
Workshop Accounts  Officer every month . The action  taken to clear the 
discrepancies should be stated in the 'Remarks' column of the Discrepancy 
Stateme nt. During audit  Discrepancy Statement should be examined carefully to 
analyse the discrepancies and action  taken to clear the same.  
Fixation /Review of Transfer  Prices (Para 234 of Indian  Railways  Rolling  Stock  
Code ). The Rolling stocks are m ainly int ended for the use on Indian Railways . 
As such while transferring the Rolling Stock  to the various Railways, the cost  
there  of is also debited  to them through Railway  Board   by the Production  Units . 
The output  of the Production Units is to be supplied on 'no profit  no loss ' basis. 
Till the time  the actual cost  of production  is known, the Railways are debited  with 
the provisional pre -determined prices fixed  by the Railway Board  on the 
recommendations  of the Production Un its. While fixing the pre -determined prices 
the trend of cost  in Production Units and other relevant factors affecting the cost  
of manufacture are taken into consideration. When batch  cost reports  are 
finalized, the consequential adjustments  are carried out with the allottee Railways 
in due course. During audit  transfer price and batch  cost report should be analysed 
with the Out turn statement and Manufacturing Account  to see that the debit  are 
raised correctly.   
Laboratory  Accounts  -Laboratories  are attached to the Production  Units  where 
tests of several articles  are carried out. It should be seen that the rates charged for 
tests by the laboratory  are sufficient to cover the expenditure  incurred in running  
the laboratory  and that the rates are revised periodically if the laboratory  accounts  
show accumulation of gum Where work  of outside parties is also carried out in 
the labo ratories , it should be seen dial recoveries  are properly made and credited  
to laboratory  accounts . 
Audit   of Others remaining items: - Audit of other remaining items should be 
conducted as per procedure laid  down under the chapter of Workshops  Audit. For 
audit  of Establishment  and Provident  Fund , Works , Stores , General  Books  
Accounts   and Appropriation  the relevant chapter of Railway  Audit Manual  may 
be referred to.  
Use of IT  Applications  in Audit  
Audit  of IT  application  being used in Production  units  may be conducted as per 
the as per the instructions/guideli nes issued by HQ office.  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
484 
For internal use of IA&AD  Local  Audit /Inspections  
Regulation on Audit   and Accounts , 2007 , stipulates three type of audit s viz. 
Financial  Audit, Compliance  Audit & Performance  Audit. Local  Audit is a part 
of compliance  audit  under which audit party check the record of audi tee through 
visit their offices.  
Compliance  with rules  and regulations  is the primary and the most important 
requirement for ensuring accountability of the public  executive . It is imperative 
that Compliance Audits are planned to achieve adequate coverage at an 
acceptably low level of audit  risk, audit processes are carried out in an economic , 
efficient and effective manner and r esult in a high  quality  Audit  Report .  Proper  
planning  and prioritization of Compliance Audits based on an appropriate  risk 
assess ment , is therefore, paramount. Thus for an effective Audit, the two 
important resources  i.e. Time and Manpower  have to be assigned properly to get 
maximum  quality  of audit output . 
Para 3.12 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines  lays emphasis on preparation of 
Annual  Audit  Plan by each field office by adopting a holistic  approach of 
covering Apex  Auditable  Entity  for eac h type of audit  and leveraging common 
processes.  The Annual Audit Plan of each office would therefore indicate the 
Apex Auditable entities/Audit units  for which com pliance  audit to be conducted.  
As per Para  304 of the Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines  sugge sts a top down  Risk 
Based approach for placing the Department /Sector  as the centre piece  of the audit  
focus and provide a scientific  mechanism  of defining Audit  Units .  
Departments /Sector being the top layer has been defined as the Apex  Auditable  
Entity .  Hierarchical formation of all Depa rtments have been prepared and 
annexed in the draft.  
The parameters  to calculate Risk  of Apex  Auditable  Unit (AAU)/Department  are 
given below:  
I) Expenditure  of the departments , weightage 30 points  
II) Salary  Expenditures, weightage ( -) 10 points  
III) Criticality of the activities of the departments  to Railway  operations , 
weightage 20 points  
IV) Auditor ’s perception, weightage 10 points and  
V) Stores  Balance , weightage 10 points.  
VI) Cash  Balance , weightage 5 points  
VII) Any other parameters  (Audit  Objection), weightage 25 points  
The assessments of risk /risk perception for the departments , the criteria  which are 
being followed for weightage of risk are as under: - 
 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
485 
For internal use of IA&AD  For Sl. No. I), I I), V ) and VI) 
a) Above 100 crore  = 100%  
b) 50 crore to 100 crore = 80% 
c) 10 crore to 50 crore  = 50% 
d) Below 10 crore  = 25% 
For Sl. No. III ) 
a) Very Critical   = 100%  
b) Critical   = 80% 
c) Less Critical   = 50% 
For Sl. No. VII ) 
a) Draft  Paragraph  = 100%  
b) Special  Letter   = 80% 
c) Part-I   = 60% 
d) Part-II   = 40% 
For risk  weightage of Audit  and Implementing  Units , the budget  provision and 
actual expe nditure  of the auditee units  have been taken into account  as main 
criteria . 
On the basis of above criteria  every year Annual  Audit  Plan for local  audit  is 
prepared by each Production  unit. 
Role and responsibilities of Apex  level and implementing authorities  of each 
Production  Unit may vary according to nature of production  and available 
hierarchy  of officers and supervisors . Thus, preparation of a uniform  check list at 
implementing units  is not practicable. However, check lists for local  audit  of 
some main department of Production Units  are as follows;  
General  Check  List of Mechanical  Department . 
Principal  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer , Workshop  and Shop  Offices  
I) Inventory  of Dead  Stock  including Machinery  and Plant . 
II) Attendance  register  and Casual  leave  Account . 
III) Uniform  and Cloth ing account . 
IV) Accounts  of surplus  store . 
V) Tenders  and Contracts . 
VI) Sanctions  to write off  of losses.  
VII) Sanctions  to undertake private  work  in Railway  Workshops . 
VIII) Review of important files . 
IX) Rolling  stock  programme . 
X) History sheet of Plant  & Machines . 
XI) Delay in the installation and commission of plants and machinery.  
XII) Utilisation of Plant  machinery.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
486 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIII) Review of Monthly  Progress  Report  of Major  works  sent to Rly. Bd. 
& GM . 
XIV)  Imprest  cash Account . 
XV) Register  of Card  passes  and provision passes . 
XVI)  Repair of cycles kept in office.  
XVII)  Narrative  Report . 
XVIII)  Record of rolling stock . 
XIX)  Scrutiny  of last Inspection  Report  by Audit & Accou nts. 
XX) Passes  and P.T .O.’S.  
XXI)  Gate  passes  and their comparison  with muster  rolls.  
XXII)  Absentee  register  along with monthly  statement of LAP , LHAP  and 
paid holidays.  
XXIII)  System  of sending out materials  from shops . 
XXIV)  Accountal  and custody of charged off stores . 
XXV)  System  of talking out shop  delivery notes  of articles  for other shop  
and inter shop  of stores . 
XXVI)  Work  order register . 
XXVII)  Accounts  of consumable  stores  with schedules.  
XXVIII)  Precentage of wastage in manufacture operations . 
XXIX)  Accountal  and disposal  of scrap  and rough metal parts arising during 
production  of coaches . 
XXX)  Accounts  receipt  and issue  of various kinds of plant in paint  shop . 
XXXI)  Departmental  verification  sheets  of raw materials . 
XXXII)  Inventory  of stationary . 
XXXIII)  Issue  notes  and Advice  Notes . 
XXXIV)  Account  of tools  taken from the Tool  Room.  
XXXV)  Cost sheets  and cost  cards . 
XXXVI)  Inspection  forms.  
XXXVII)  Review of punishment cases of workshop staff . 
XXXVIII)  System  of accounting and allocation  of stores . 
XXXIX)  Short leave  register . 
XL) Tool  & Plant  register  
XLI) System  of opening and closing of work  orders.  
XLII)  System  of booking  of labours and materials  into work  orders.  
XLIII)  System  for dispatch of manufactured locomotives /coaches  to different 
Zonal  Railways . 
XLIV)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
Principal  Chief  Material  Manager /Store Depot  – Stores  Department  
I) System  of acceptance of Tenders . 
II) System  of accountal of Misc . cash  receipts . 
III) Fund  register . 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
487 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Review of Risk  Purchase  cases.  
V) Attendance  register  and Casual  leave  Account . 
VI) Inventory  of Dead  stock , Stationa ry & Forms and Office  Library . 
VII) Review of Tenders , Purchase  Orders , rejection  register , register  of 
defaulting  firms, contracts  and Agreements.  
VIII) Scrutiny  of last Inspection  Report  by Audit & Accounts . 
IX) Review of cases of Thefts  of Railway  Stores . 
X) Imprest  Account . 
XI) Position of surplus  stock  and system  of arrangement for their disposal . 
XII) Lot register  of Scrap . 
XIII) Auction  sale register . 
XIV)  Review of system  of arrangement for receipt , custody, storage, 
disposal  of samples supplied by firms and  issue  of stores . 
XV) Accountal  of vouchers  of miscellaneous  receipts . 
XVI)  Gate  passes  and method of watching the stores  going out of Depot . 
XVII)  Accountal  custody and disposal  of scrap . 
XVIII)  Register  of Service  Stamps . 
XIX)  Passes  and P.T.O.’s.  
XX) Card  passes  movement register . 
XXI)  General  review of record of missing  stores . 
XXII)  System  of delivery of materials . 
XXIII)  Breakages  and written off under competent  sanctions . 
XXIV)  System  of forwarding list of surplus  stores  to the other Railways . 
XXV)  System  of Stock  verification . 
XXVI)  Review of system  regarding action  taken on difference brought out as 
a result of stock  verification . 
XXVII)  System  of delivery of material  to the  workshops . 
XXVIII)  Clothing  and liveries  account . 
XXIX)  Receipt  notes , returns  vouchers  and issue  notes . 
XXX)  Work  order register . 
XXXI)  Leave  accounts  and service  books . 
XXXII)  Tools  and plant register . 
XXXIII)  Uniform  account . 
XXXIV)  Sanctioned  strength  and on roll  position of staff . 
XXXV)  Credit  Notes . 
XXXVI)  R.M.C . Notes . 
XXXVII)  Sale delivery orders.  
XXXVIII)  Bill for com mission.  
XXXIX)  Review of files  relating to receipts  of stores . 
XL) Review of sanctions . 
XLI) Consumable  and petty  stores . 
XLII)  Empties  and their acc ountal.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
488 
For internal use of IA&AD  XLIII)  Pay order book.  
XLIV)  Local  purchase  of stores . 
XLV)  Review of missing  consignment and claim cases.  
XLVI)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
Prin cipal  Chief  Personnel  Officer – Personnel Department . 
I) Man power  Planning  
II) Recruitment . 
III) Training  and development  
IV) Performance  Appraisal  
V) Maintenance  of Service  Book and Leave  account  
VI) Attendance  register  for the month  selected.  
VII) Casual  leave  register . 
VIII) Reconciliation  of items 1 & 2.  
IX) Office  orders regarding actual date of taking over higher duties and 
posting in service  book General  Review.  
X) Posting of sanctioned  leave  of leave  period in the service  Books . 
XI) Regularization of absence before pay  for the pay  is charged in the pay  
bills. 
XII) Review of compliance  different staff  office orders.  
XIII) Verification  of increment  certificates with the entries in the service  
books  and pay  bills. 
XIV)  Check  of fixation  and re -fixation  of pay . 
XV) Check  of salary bills . 
XVI)  Appointment  of substitutes . 
XVII)  Imprest  cash Account . 
XVIII)  Check  of Stationary  account . 
XIX)  Check  of Stamp  Account . 
XX) Check of inventory  of Dead  stock . 
XXI)  Check  of Settlement  & pension cases of officers and staff . 
XXII)  Check  of leave  account . 
XXIII)  Check  of Pass / P.TO’s.  
XXIV)  Uniform  and clothing register . 
XXV)  Review of important files  relating to staff  matters.  
XXVI)  Check  of register  showing distribution  of posts  among various grades.  
XXVII)  Check  of card passes . 
XXVIII)  Review of system  to ensure that penalties  imposed by the deptt. Have 
been posted in  the service  book.  
XXIX)  Lease  of railway  building  to outsiders and other Govt . Department  and 
recoveries  of taxes , rent  and water  charges  thereof.  
XXX)  Attendance  register  and Casual  leave  Account . 
XXXI)  Proper  maintenance  of Index  register  of secret cases.  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
489 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXII)  Cycle  Account .  
XXXIII)  Library  Account  of Books  including codes  and publication.  
XXXIV)  Log Books . 
XXXV)  Telepho ne Account . 
XXXVI)  Issue  notes  and advice notes . 
XXXVII)  Scrutiny  of last inspection  Report  by Audit / Account . 
XXXVIII)  Tool & Plant  register . 
XXXIX)  Check  of T.A. Bills . 
XL) Sanctioned  strength  and on roll  position of staff  and officers.  
XLI) Review of servic e Record of staff . 
XLII)  System  of Sanctioning, Payment and recovery of various Advances . 
XLIII)  System  for appointment  on compassionate  ground . 
XLIV)  Other Labour  welfare  related issues.  
XLV)  Review of staff  benefit funds.  
XLVI)  Review of pay  orders.  
XLVII)  Review of court  cases decided against the Rlys.  
XLVIII)  Environmental  issue and its related aspects.  
Principal  Chief  Engineer  – Engineering  Department . 
I) Imprest  Account . 
II) Contracts  & tenders , work  orders & tender  registers . 
III) Sale account  of tender  forms, schedule  of rates.  
IV) Estimate  & completio n reports . 
V) Contractor bill, measurement  books  and works  registers . 
VI) Bills  for store  transactions.  
VII) Payment of municipal  taxes  and water  charges . 
VIII) Questions of policy  regarding tenders , security  deposits etc.  
IX) Check  of Inventory  of Dead  Stock . 
X) Check  of Stationary  account . 
XI) Clothing  and uniform  account . 
XII) Miscellaneous  cash receipts . 
XIII) Attendance  register  and Casual  leave  Account . 
XIV)  Contingent  vouchers  and expenditure  for contingency . 
XV) Comparison  of rates paid to temporary labour  with civil or other rates.  
XVI)  Scrutiny  of system  of delegation of powers.  
XVII)  Issue  noted and advice notes . 
XVIII)  Narrative  reports . 
XIX)  Liability  reports . 
XX) Review of list of buildings .  
XXI)  Land  leave  register  and agreement.  
XXII)  Review of non schedule  rates.  
XXIII)  Review of register  of allotment of quarter to staff . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
490 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIV)  Muster  roll and identification  register  of temporary.  
XXV)  Departmental  verification  of stores . 
XXVI)  Review of Arbitration  cases.  
XXVII)  Empties  and their accountal.  
XXVIII)  Register  of measurement  books  including standard mea surement  
books . 
XXIX)  Accountal  of tress and sale of trees, grass  etc. 
XXX)  Store ledger  including tracing of issue  notes . 
XXXI)  Library  Accou nt of Books . 
XXXII)  Log Books . 
XXXIII)  Scrutiny  of last Inspection  Report  by Audit & Accounts . 
XXXIV)  Review of imported  files. 
XXXV)  Tools  and plant register . 
XXXVI)  Consumable  store  and store  account  of Chief  Health  Inspectors . 
XXXVII)  Zone wo rk contracts  of sanitation  and sweeping.  
XXXVIII)  Scrutiny  of conservancy contracts . 
XXXIX)  Accountal  of scrap  material . 
XL) Environmental  issue  and its related aspects  
XLI) Statutory  recovery including labour  cess.  
Principal  Chief  Electric  Engineer  – Electrical  Department  
I) Imprest  Account . 
II) Contracts  & tenders . 
III) Supply  of electric  current  to outsiders - policy  rates and agreements.  
IV) Estimate  & sanctions . 
V) Financial  justification  of electric  procurement  and check of recovery 
of electric  duty. 
VI) Review of policy  matters and other important Files . 
VII) Generating cost  at the Rly. Power  House  & comparison  of rates 
adopted for recoveries . 
VIII) Review of Policy  regarding tenders , security  deposits etc.  
IX) Check  of Inventory  of Dead  Stock . 
X) Check  of stationary  account . 
XI) Review of work  programme  and purchase  of machinery and tools  
relating to Electric  Department . 
XII) Miscellaneous  cash receipts . 
XIII) Attendance  register  and casual  leave  register . 
XIV)  Contingent  vouchers  and expenditure  from contingency . 
XV) Comparison  of rates paid to temporary labour  with civil or other rates.  
XVI)  Scrutiny  of system  of delegation of powers.  
XVII)  Issue  noted and advice notes . 
XVIII)  Narrative  reports . 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
491 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIX)  Library  accountal and system  of purchase  of books  and periodicals.  
XX) Progress  report of major  works  sent to Rly. Bd. & GM . 
XXI)  Muster  roll and identification  register  of temporary labour . 
XXII)  Departmental  verification  of stores . 
XXIII)  Review of Arbitration  cases.  
XXIV)  Empties  and their accountal.  
XXV)  Register  of measurement  books . 
XXVI)  Store ledgers  including tracing of issue  notes . 
XXVII)  Log Books . 
XXVIII)  Scrutiny  of last inspection  Report  by Audit & Accounts . 
XXIX)  Review o f important files . 
XXX)  Tools  & plant register . 
XXXI)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
XXXII)  Solar Energy   
Chief  Medical  Superintendent  – Medical Department  
I) Check  of Stamps  and Stationary  account . 
II) Misc . cash  collections.  
III) Diet charges  and register  of indoor patients.  
IV) Washing charges  and contracts  for washing  of linen . 
V) Attendance  register  and casual  leave  registe r. 
VI) Sanctioned  strength . 
VII) Store ledger .  
i) Consumable  stores .  
ii) Dead  Stock . 
iii) Linen  of nurse.  
iv) Instruments, surgical  etc. 
v) Medicines  to staff  and to outsiders.  
vi) Clothing  and uniform . 
vii) Scrapped  materials . 
viii) Requisition  of issue  notes of store . 
VIII) Review of Passes  and P.T.O’s account . 
IX) Imprest  Account . 
X) Tools  and Plant  register . 
XI) Review of important c ases.  
XII) Accounts  of ambulance  cars, petrol account  and log books . 
XIII) Roster  of duties of nurses and ward  boys.  
XIV)  Account  of X ray plant.  
XV) Review of reg ister of pathology report.  
XVI)  Check  of boarding allowance to nurses.  
XVII)  Visitors and complaint  books . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
492 
For internal use of IA&AD  XVIII)  Local  purchase  and purchase  orders of medicines  and other 
equipment . 
XIX)  Review of Tenders  and contracts . 
XX) Sanctions  to write off  expired medicines  including theft  and loss es 
and breakage etc.  
XXI)  Agreement  made with Honorary  and contract  doctors.  
XXII)  Accounts  of films and chemicals by the radiographer.  
XXIII)  Library  register . 
XXIV)  Issue  notes  and advice notes . 
XXV)  Tool  and Plant  register . 
XXVI)  Scrutiny  of last inspection  Report  by Audit & Accounts . 
XXVII)  Departmental  verification  of stores . 
XXVIII)  Consumable  store  and store  account  of Chief  Health  Inspecto r. 
XXIX)  Review of sample checked by CHI.  
XXX)  Contract  of sweeping and cleaning.  
XXXI)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
Chief  Quality  Assurance  Manager   
I) Attendance  register  and casual  leave  register . 
II) Check  of inventory  of Dead  stock . 
III) Issue notes  and advice notes . 
IV) Check  of Stamps  and Stationary  account . 
V) Gate  passes . 
VI) Machinery  register . 
VII) Consumable  and petty  stores  register . 
VIII) Recovery  of testing  charges  on sample received from various parties.  
IX) Chemical  ledgers . 
X) Laboratory  equipment  and appliance ledgers . 
XI) Glassware ledgers . 
XII) Electric  appliance ledgers . 
XIII) Empties  account . 
XIV)  Breakage  Register . 
XV) Register  of Samples.  
XVI)  Scrutiny  of test certificates with the help of sample register . 
XVII)  Delay in testing  of cases.  
XVIII)  System  of Testing  of assemblies and communication  of testing  report.  
XIX)  Customer (other Railways ) complaints . 
XX) System  of advising recovery of testi ng charges  relating to assemblies 
failed during testing . 
XXI)  Review of sanction strength . 
XXII)  Scrutiny  of last Inspection  report by Audit & Accounts . 
XXIII)  Departmental  verification  of Stores . 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
493 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXIV)  Tools  and plant register . 
XXV)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
Securit y Commissioner  – Security Department  
I) Imprest  registers . 
II) Attendance  register  and casual  leave  registe r. 
III) Check  of Stamps  and Stationary  account . 
IV) Review of policy  matters and other important files . 
V) Distribution  of staff  sanctioned  and their deployment  at different 
posts . 
VI) Check  of Inventory  of Dead  Stock . 
VII) Review of works  programme  and purchase  of machinery and tools      
VIII) relating to security  department.  
IX) Miscellaneous  cash receipts . 
X) Contingent  vouchers  and expenditure  from contingency . 
XI) List of books  and periodicals purchased from contingency . 
XII) Rewards  payment of watch and ward  staff. 
XIII) Uniform  register . 
XIV)  Cell allowance  
XV) Review of band register . 
XVI)  Issue  notes  and advice notes . 
XVII)  Cases of theft  loss 
XVIII)  Night  duty allowance  
XIX)  Ration  allowance  
XX) Motor  cycle  and cycle  Account . 
XXI)  Review of dog squad . 
XXII)  Departmental  verification  of stores . 
XXIII)  Review of Ammunition  account  and utilization of ammunitions . 
XXIV)  Log Books  of different vehicles  
XXV)  Scrutiny  of last Inspection  Report  by Audit & Accounts . 
XXVI)  Review of important cases.  
XXVII)  Tool  and Plant  register . 
XXVIII)  System  of investigation of crime cases and their pursuance into court . 
XXIX)  System  of firefighting  arrangement.  
XXX)  Review of Mess  Account . 
XXXI)  Review of inward and outward Gate  pass register . 
XXXII)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
Accounts  Department  
PF Section  of Accounts  Department  
I) Review of PF  Ledger  card. 
II) Review of PF  pay order book and Bill  Book.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
494 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Review of system  of Temporary  and final withdrawal  and its posting 
into ledger  card/ books . 
IV) System  of PF  Loan  recovery.  
V) Review of List  of closed Accounts . 
VI) PF settlement cases.  
VII) Previous year ledger  of PF . 
VIII) Reconciliation  with General  Books . 
IX) Review of Employee PF  transfer IN.  
X) Review of Employee PF  transfer OUT.  
XI) Issuance  of PF  Books /Slips to employees . 
Accounts  Department  
Chief  Cashier  and Cash  verification  (Accounts  Deptt.)  
I) Cash  Book of Chief  Cashier  and Cas hiers/Pay  Clerks  etc. 
II) Verification  of cash  in hand  with Chief  Cashier / Pay  Clerks  actual count 
with record.  
III) Unpaid  bills outstanding  and the amount of unpaid  wages  should be 
ascertained to see that no unauthorized use of money has been made.  
IV) Recoupment  of cash  and its en try in the record.  
V) Cash  Book of Assistant  Chief  Cashier  (A.C.Cs) and cash  balances.  
VI) Return and paid vouchers  and clearance certificates, obtained from the 
Accounts  Office . 
VII) Miscellaneous  cash receipt . 
General  Branch  including Office  of the Secretary  of General Manager , 
Deputy  General Manager  and other subordinate  officers  
I) Attendance  register  for the month  selected.  
II) Casual  leave  register . 
III) Reconciliation  of items 1 & with 2.  
IV) Office  order regarding actual date of taking over higher duties and 
posting in service  book General  Review.  
V) Posting of sanctioned  leave  of leave  period in service  Books . 
VI) Regularisation of absence before the pay  is charged in the pay  bills. 
VII) Compliance  with staff  Officer orders.  
VIII) Verification  of increment  certificates with the entries in the service  
book.  
IX) Check  of fixation  and re -fixation  of pay . 
X) Check  of T.A. Bills . 
XI) Appointment  of substitutes . 
XII) Imprest  cash Account . 
XIII) Check  of stationary  account . 
XIV)  Check  of Stamp  Account . 
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
495 
For internal use of IA&AD  XV) Check  of Inventory  of Dead  stock . 
XVI)  Check  of Settlement  cases. 
XVII)  Check  of leave  accounts . 
XVIII)  Check  of Passes  & P.T.O’s.  
XIX)  Uniform  and clothing account . 
XX) Review of important files . 
XXI)  Check  of register  showing distribution  of posts  among various grades.  
XXII)  Check  of card passes . 
XXIII)  System  to ensure that penalties  imposed by the deptt. Have  been 
posted in the service  book.  
XXIV)  Check  to annual  certificate  for verification  of pensionable service  in 
the service  book.  
XXV)  Proper  maintenance  of Index  register  of Secret  cases.  
XXVI)  Cycle  Account . 
XXVII)  Library  Account  of books  including codes  and publication.  
XXVIII)  Log books . 
XXIX)  Telephone  Account . 
XXX)  Review of Expenditure  on Ceremonies, Independence  Day, Republic  
Day and Railway  Week award . 
XXXI)  Hospitality  Fund . 
XXXII)  Issue  notes  and advice notes . 
XXXIII)  Scrutiny  of last Inspection  Report  of Aud it& Accounts . 
XXXIV)  Report  of losses sent to Rly.Bd.  
XXXV)  Review of rest  House . 
XXXVI)  Tool  & Plant  register . 
XXXVII)  Sales  account  of books  and pamphlets.  
XXXVIII)  Railway  advertisements  on Rly. Premises.  
XXXIX)  Railway  advertisement and charges  thereon.  
XL) Accounts  of photography.  
XLI) Record relating to rest  house . 
XLII)  Purchase  of books , PERIODICALS, Newspapers  & Govt . 
Publications etc.  
XLIII)  Check  of Accounts  of Railway  Magazines.  
XLIV)  Expenditure  on distinguished visitors.  
XLV)  Environmental  issue  and its related aspects.  
XLVI)  Allotment  of car or staff  car 
XLVII)  Vehicle  permit inside railway  colony .   
 
 
  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
496 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of Abbreviation  
Sl. No.  List Abbreviation  
1 AAI Apex  Auditable  Unit 
2 ACC  Assistant  Chief  Cashier  
3 CHI Chief  Health  Inspector  
4 CLW  Chittaranjan Locomotive  Works  
5 CQAM  Chief  Quality  Assurance  Manager  
6 CVO  Chief  Vigilance  Officer  
7 DLW  Diesel  Locomotive  Works  
8 DMW  Diesel  Modernization  Works  
9 Dy. CME  Dy. Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  
10 GA Gate  attendance  
11 GIS Group  Incentive  Scheme  
12 ICF Integral Coach  Factory  
13 IT Information  Technology  
14 JE Junior  Engineer  
15 LAP  Leave  on Average  Pay 
16 LHAP  Leave  on Half Average  Pay 
17 MCF  Modern  Coach  Factory  
18 NEFT /RTGS  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer / Real Time Gross 
Settlement  
19 PCE Principal  Chief  Engineer  
20 PCEE  Principal  Chief  Electrical  Engineer  
21 PCME  Principal  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  
22 PCMM  Principal  Chief  Material  Manager  
23 PCMO  Principal  Chie f Medical  Officer  
24 PCPO  Principal  Chief  Personnel  Officer  
25 PDA  Principal  Director  of Audit  
26 PF Provident  Fund  
27 PFA Principal  Financial  Adviser  
28 PTO  Privilege  Ticket Order  
29 PU Production  Unit 
30 RCF  Rail Coach  Factory  
31 RMC  Railway  Material  Consignment  
32 RWF  Rail Wheel  Factory  
33 SSE Senior  Section  Engineer  
34 WMS  Workshop  Manufacture  Suspense  
 
 
  
Chapter 13 – Audit of Production Units  
 
497 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
498 
For internal use of IA&AD   CHAPTER 14 - AUDIT OF STORES DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
The Stores  Department  performs a significant and major  role in all the activities  
of Indian  Railways . These are directly connected with train operations  and 
contribute to productivity  and earnings . The activities also interface  with 
customers  and thereby reflect the image of Indian railways. The major functions  
of stores  department are planning  of procurement , procurement , Inspection , 
stocking  & warehousing , inve ntory  management  and disposal  of unserviceable  & 
obsolete items.  
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARC HY OF STORES DEPARTMENT  
The department is organized in three tiers. The top tier is at the Railway  Board  
level, the second tier at the Zonal  Railway level and the third tier at the divis ional  
or the Depot  level/Consignee  level.  
At the Railway  Board  level, this department is headed by Member  (Traction  & 
Rolling  Stock ) who is ex-officio Secretary  to the Government  of India . Member 
(Traction & Rolling Stock ) is in turn assisted by Additional  Member (Rai lway 
Stores ), Principal  Executive  Directors , Executive Directors and Directors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minister of Railways  
Minister of State of Railways  
Chairman, Railway Board  
Member, Material Management  
Additional Member (Railway Stores)  Additional Member/ Railway Stores  (P) 
 
Principal Executive Director/ Railway Stores (P)  Principal Executive Director/Railway Stores (C)  
 
Executive Director/ 
Railway Stores (G)  
 Executive Director/ 
Railway Stores (C)  
 Executive Director/ 
Railway Stores (S)  
 Executive Director/ 
Railway Stores (P)  
 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
499 
For internal use of IA&AD  At the zonal levels, the principal head  of the department is the Principal  Chief  
Materials  Manager  (PCMM ). The PCMM is assisted by Chief Materials 
Managers  (CMMs). These CMMs in turn have var ious Dy.  Chief Materials 
Managers , and in turn, they are assisted by the Senior  Materials Managers  and 
the Assistant  Materials Managers . The Stores  department manages many 
warehouses  that feed into the repair workshops  and maintenance  sheds . The 
Warehouses  called depots  headed by a Depot  Officer. Depots attached to 
workshops  are headed by Dy. CMMs, and electric  and diesel locomotive  sheds 
headed by SMMs. These depots  directly report to PCMM. Division  headed by Sr. 
DMMs who report to Divisional  Railway  Managers . Sr. DMMs are responsible 
for material  management  at divisional  level  who caters the  needs of other  
branches of divisions . Stores Department  is responsible for coordination  of scrap  
arising out of division  and wo rkshops  in close association with the other  
departments .  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 3.4 to 3.6 may be read for determination of 
Apex  Unit, Audit Units  and Implementing  Units. Compliance Audit Guidelines  
Para 3.4 to 3.6 may be read for determination of Apex Unit, Audit Units and 
Implementing Units)   
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1  At Railway  Board  level  
I) All Policy  matters related to Procurement  and stocking  of Stores . 
II) Inventory  Management , Budget  allocation  under suspense  
head . 
III) Co-ordination  with DGS&D  in conclusion of Rate  Contracts  
and other related Railway  Matters. MMIS, E -Procurement  etc. 
IV) All Policy  Matters related to printing & printing presses . 
V) Procurement  of Wagons  
VI) Procurement  of Steel  (for wagon  building  & Rlys.)   
VII) Import  of complete rolling stock , Accident  Relief  Cranes  and 
R/C for spares  of stock . 
VIII) Indigenous  procurement  of Wheels, Tyres & Axles.  
IX) Man Power  Planning . 
X) Procurement  of Petroleum , Oils& Lubricants . 
XI) Procurement  Policies of Textiles  
XII) Disposal  of Scrap , e-auction  
3.2 At Zonal  level  
I) Maintain  centralized co ntrol  over purchase , custody, issue  and disposal  of 
stores  
II) Approval  of Price Ledger  (PL) No.  
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
500 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) Maintain ready availability of stores  required by the Railway   
IV) Preparation  of correct estimate  of the quantities of stores  to be purchased 
or manufactured in the railway  workshops  each year  
V) Ensure the most advantageous arrangements possible for the economic  
purchase  of stores . 
VI) Maintenance  of numerical  records of stores  in stock . 
VII) Survey , valuation  and disposal  by sale or otherwise of all materials  and 
stores  for which the consuming departments  have no immediate use and 
returned to the Stores  Depots . 
VIII) Dealing with all the surplus  and unserviceable  material  of the Railway . 
3.3  At Division / Depot  (Field) level  
I) Indenting of materials  required  
II) Initiation of issue  of Price Ledger  (PL) No.  
III) Receipt  and inspection  of materials  or stores   
IV) Procurement  of stores  as per their authority  
V) Stocking and issue  of stores  
VI) Proper  accountal of stores  
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES  
Level of 
unit Main activity  Allied/ sub activity  
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Procurement   1. Analysis  of Requirement of 
Stores  
   2.  Quantity assessment  
   3.   Indenting  
   4.   Tender  process  
   5.   Placing of Purchase  Order  
Field units  Receipt  and Inspection  1. Inspection  of received stores  
2. Issue  of Receipt  Notes  
3.Accountal  of Stores  received  
Field units  Stocking of Materials  1. Accountal  of Stores  in hand  
2.Proper  arrangements for 
stocking  
3. Entry in Daily  Receipt  
Register  (DRR ) 
Field units  Issue  of Materials  1. Issue  of Stores  against 
requisition  
2. Proper  accountal and 
disposal  of Inactive  and 
overstock items  
3. Issue  of Delivery  Notes  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
501 
For internal use of IA&AD  4. Accountal  of Stores  issued  
RB, Apex  & 
Field units  Disposals by sale or 
transfer of scrap , 
unserviceable , surplus  
and obsolete s tores  1. Declaration of scrap  
2. Sorting and storage of scrap  
3. Valuation of scrap  
4. Disposable of scrap   
5. Delivery  of scrap  including 
specialized weighments  
Apex  & 
Field units  Introduction and 
application  of new  
system  1. Indian  Railway  E-
procurement  System  ( IREPS ) 
(i) E-Tender  (Goods  & 
Services ) 
(ii) E-Auction  
2. Integrated  Material  
Management  Information  
System  (IMM IS) 
(Compliance  Audit  Strategy  of these activities can be prepared according to the 
Para 3.15, 4.7 & 4.8 of the Compliance Auditing  Guidelines  2016 ) 
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS:  
The risk  analysis  should be done on following para meters  of the Stores  
Department ’s activities:  
I) Quantum  of Expenditure . 
II) Number of Tender  cases/ Purchase  Order cases/ other misc. cases.  
III) When last audited  viz. audited  during  last one year/three year/five 
year/more than five year/never audited . 
IV) Result  of last audit. 
V) Audit  perception based on Arrears v iz. progress of works  with reference 
to expenditure . 
VI) Audit  perception based on Newspaper  publication, Complaints  lodged 
etc. 
VII) Criticality of the activities of the departmen t to operations  of the 
Railways . 
VIII) Store balance  on hand . 
IX) Risk & cost  purchase , Over  stocking  of store , Non-disposal  of surplus  
store , Inactive  items, etc.  
(Risk parameters  of the Apex  Auditable  Entities  and their Audit  Units  can be 
assessed by considering Para  3.9 to 3.11  & 4.13 to 4.15 of the Compliance  
Auditing  Guidelines  2016 ) 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
502 
For internal use of IA&AD  6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN STORES DEPARTMENT  
The Indian  Railways  embarked on a speed  work of switching over to IT  driven 
administration of functions  and have implemented various IT Applications  in the 
last few years .  Presently, following IT applications  are in use in the Stores  
Department , from which the detailed information can be extracted for exercising 
Audit  checks , as stated against each items above.  
(Information  Technology  Audit  Manual  Volume -I, II and III. Para 4.20 - 
Compliance  auditing  in digital  environment of the Compli ance Auditing  
Guidelines  2016.   Chapter 3 of Regulation of Audit  and Account  (Amendme nts) 
2020.  Standing  Order on Auditing  in an Information  Technology  (IT) 
environment 2020 ) 
6.1 Indian  Railways  E-Procurement  System  (IREPS ) 
This is official  portal  of Indian  Railways  for procurement  of Goods , e-tendering  
of Works  & Services , Sale  of Materials , and Leasing  of Assets  through the 
process of E -Tendering , E-auction  or Reverse  Auction . 
The site is compliant to IT Act 2000  and follows the instructions / guidelines  
issued by Ministry  of Railways  from time to time  for procurement , sale and 
leasing . The site provides a secure platform to users for online  transactions for 
procurement  and sale. The site caters to requirements of all Zonal  Rlys. and 
Production  Units  of Indian  Railways , and is also being used by PSUs  like Konkan  
Railway  Corporation  Limited  (KRCL ), and Delhi  Metro  Rail Corporation 
(DMRC) etc.  
IREPS , web -based platform, mainly caters E -Tender  and E-Auction .  
6.1.1  E-Tender   
E-Tender  are of two types – E-Tender  for Works  and E -Tender for Goods  and 
Services , the later deals with stores  matters.  
Railway  users can upload their tender  documents  and can open tenders  online . 
Registered Vendors can access the tender  documents  through this site and submit 
their bids online, duly encrypted at client machine  itself. Authorized Vendors can 
view system  generated tabulations  online. They have been provided facility for 
SMS  alerts/email alerts for important events.  
Vendors can also make electronic  payments  for Tender  Document Cost  and 
Earnest Money  through Direct  Debit Facility of State  Bank  of India . 
To access all the resources /features  of the IREPS  application  the users are 
required to login  into the application . Several of the critical features like bidding  
against the tenders , viewing reports  etc. can be accessed only after logging in. 
Logging into the applica tion requires a username and password provided by the 
EPS administrator. However, some of the functions /resources  of the application  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
503 
For internal use of IA&AD  like searching tenders , viewing public  documents , user manuals  etc. can be 
accessed by users even not logging into the system . 
I) Scope  
a) Publication  of Tender  
b) Receipt  of offer  
c) Tabulation  of the offer both Financial  and Tech no-commercial  
d) Online  Technical  Evaluation  
e) Issue  of Letter of Negotiation  
f) Receipt  of Negotiation  Bid 
g) Issue  of Counter Offer Letter.  
h) Acceptance of offer  
i) Issue  of Letter of Acceptance . 
II) Reports  
Following main reports  are generated by the application : 
a) Tenders  Count & Value  
b) Tender  Settlement  Progress  
c) Pending  Tenders  
d) High  Value Tenders  
e) Online  Payment Report  
f) Online  Supplier Bills  Status  
g) Earnest Money  Deposit  (EMD ) Refund  Status  
h) Daily  Report  (HQ) – Comparative  statement among zones in respect 
of availability of stores , position of Scrap , Cash  Realisation etc.  
i) Daily  Report  (All units ) - Comparative  statement among various 
depots  in respect of availability of stores , position of Scrap , Cash  
Realisation et c. 
j) Letter of Credit  Report  
In ‘Search  Tender ’ option of the application  the details of Te nder document, 
Published corrigendum, offers, commercial  and financi al tabulation  and audit  
trail can be found on the basis of the Tender Number, Name of Work , Item Code , 
Item Description.  
Apart from the above, many reports  in conn ection of E -Tender  can be viewed in 
iMM IS, discussed later.  
6.1.2  GeM  purchases  
Rule 149 of General  Financial  Rule (GFR )-2017, issued by Ministry  of Fin ance 
legislate as under: - 
Government  e-Market place (GeM ): DGS&D  or any agency authorised by the 
government will host an online  Government e -Market place for common use for 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
504 
For internal use of IA&AD  Goods a nd Services. The procurement  of Goods and Services by ministries or 
Departments will be mandatory for Goods or services available on GeM. The 
GeM portal  shall be utilised by the Government buyers for direct online purchas e. 
As per delegation of power circulated by Railway  Board  procurement of 
following Services through GeM has been made mandatory: - 
Procurement of common use Goods and Services available on GeM . 
Services like hiring  of vehicles, transportation of material, sanitization and 
housekeeping services, skilled/unskilled manpower hiring, professional staff 
hiring, office equipment hiring, digitization services, etc. available on GeM . 
3.  The Stores  officers posted in Divisions, Depots, HQ and other extra Divisional 
units are authorized to procure Services for all users of their units or the units as 
assigned by respective PCMM . Stores officers shall procure such services on 
submission o f demands or request by the user(s) along with sanction of competent 
authority and fund availability certificate.  
PO data are received in iMMS  from GeM  through web  service based on which a 
covering PO is generated in iMMS  for both Stock  and Non -stock items. Once 
supply is received and accepted by consignee on GeM Consignee's Receipt and 
Acceptance Certificate (CRAC ) details and bill data is received in iMMS from 
GeM through web service. Covering PO along with bill data & CRAC details are 
pushed to IPAS  for payment. A copy of the invoice will also be sent to IPAS (as 
in Bill data). R/Note is generated in iMMS for accountal of material in iMMS. 
Payments are made by paying authority thro ugh IPAS. IPAS push the bill 
payment data to iMMS and iMMS in turn push that data to GeM for updating 
their payment records.  
Pending Development  of Return Bills handing facility to be launched by GeM , a 
special screen has be en developed by CRIS in "Executive  Bills" module of IPAS  
for capturing re -submission of Returned bills . This facility has been provided for 
Executives  while processing returned GeM bills. This  will establish linkage of 
returned GeM bills between IPAS & GeM and ensure timely updating of payment 
status on GeM portal  along with reduction of discrepancies between GeM and 
Railways  data.  
For procurements made under Rul e 149 of GFR  2017, buyers are mandated to 
make payments within 10 calendar days after generation (including auto 
generation) of Consignee Receipt and Acceptance Certificate (CRAC ) in the 
GeM . Otherwise the buyer organis ation will be required to pay penal interest 1% 
per month of the delayed payment beyond the prescribed timeline till the date of 
such payment.  
 
 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
505 
For internal use of IA&AD  Audit  Check: - 
It should be seen in Audit . 
I) Whether the Finance  Offic ers of Zonal Railways , PUs  and other units 
have taken an undertaking from the executive  officers while vetting the 
estimates and tender documents that the item/service will be procured 
through GeM  only,   
II) Whether all GeM  bills (Goods and Services both) have been generated by 
the executives online  through GeM and forward it to IPAS  (through 
iMMS ). 
III) Whether the Registration of GeM  Fresh bills  (Goods and Services both) 
have been done though” Registration (online  Bills) - GeM Bill 
Registration" option provided to Accounts  under "Bill Passing" module 
of IPAS . 
IV) Whether the GeM  bills which were returned by Accounts , have been 
resubmitted by Executive  through special screen only by following 
"Registration - GeM Returned Bills" option provided under “Executive 
Bills" module of IPAS . 
V) Whether GeM  portal  have been utilised by the user department to buy 
goods (Non -stock) directly through any of the available suppliers on GeM 
valuing up to Rs.25,000/ - in case subject to prescribed ann ual ceiling 
(presently Rs. 10 lakhs)  
VI) Whether the GeM  portal  have been utilised for procuring goods and 
services valuing up to Rs.50,000/ - through any of the available suppliers 
on GeM, meeting the requisite quantity, specificatio n and delivery period.  
VII) Whether the GeM  portal  have been utilised for procuring goods and 
services valuing between Rs. 50,000/ - and Rs.30,00,000/ - through GeM 
seller having lowest price amongst the available sellers, of at least t hree 
different manufacturers, meeting the requisite quantity, specification and 
delivery period.  
VIII) Whether for procuring goods and services valuing above Rs.30,00,000/ - 
through the suppliers having lowest price, meeting the requisite quantity, 
specification and delivery period after mandatory obtaining bids, using 
online  bidding or reverse auction tool provided on GeM . 
IX) Whether delegation of powers, authority for approval and limits thereof 
for regular purchase, on stores matters, as  per extant delegation have been 
applied in relation of procurements of goods and services available on 
GeM . 
X) Whether railway have paid penal interest for delayed payment beyond the 
prescribed timeline.  
 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
506 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.1.3 E-Auction  
Through t his platform of IREPS  all the works  related to auction sale of scrap  is 
being done.  
I) Scope  
a) Creation  of Lot  
b) Creation  of Auction  Catalogue  
c) Creation / Updation of E -Auction  Schedule  
d) Registration  of Bidders  
e) Publication  of Auction  
f) Receipt  of Bids  
g) Preparation  of Bid  sheet  
h) Disposal  of Stores  
II) Reports  
a) E-Auction  Schedule  of all units  
b) Auction  Reports  are be ing generated in iMM IS 
c) Auction  yet to start  
d) Live Auction / Under  Decision  
e) Closed Auctions  
f) Sold Lots  
g) Invoices  
h) Rejected  Lots 
Apart from the above, many reports  in connection of E -Tender  can be viewed in 
iMM IS, discussed later.  
Detail about of IREPS  may be seen para 6E in the Audit  of Engineering  
Department  chapter.  
6.2 Integrated  Material  Management  Information  System  (iMM IS) 
Integrated  Materials  Management  Information  System  (iMMIS) is the 
Application  Software  for Materials Management Department  of Indian  Railways  
for online  activities for Procurement  of Goods  by Headquarters /Stocking Depots , 
Receipt  and Issue  of materials  at Stocking Depots and Sale  of Materials using E -
Tendering , E-Auction  and Reverse  Auction of Indian Railways  E-Procurement  
System (IREPS ). 
The applicati on allows users to capture or generate data at various levels of the 
Materials  Management  process in a secure manner using various security  features  
like digital  signature , digital  encryption  certificate  for encryption  and decryption 
of data etc. The application  can be accessed with valid use r ID and Password in 
combination with a Digital Signing Certificate . The application  is divided in 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
507 
For internal use of IA&AD  different work  areas depending upon the nature of activity viz. HQ  Module , 
Depot Module, Auction  Sale Module, Purchase  Module for Depot/Division  etc.  
I) Scope  
a) Opening of PL  No. by Depot  and approval  by Zonal  H.Q. , nominated 
for allotting PL that material  
b) Generation  of Demand  for Stock  items  
c) Registering Non  Stock  Demand / Non Stock Requisition  
d) Preparation  of Purchase  Proposal  
e) Clubbing  of Purchase  Proposals/ Registered Demands  
f) Tender  Schedule   
g) Creation  and publication of Tender  
h) Approval  and Publication  of Tender  to Issue  of LOA  in E-Tender  of 
IREPS  
i) Creation  of Dr aft P.O 
j) Approval  and Publication  of P.O  
k) Modification  of P.O.  
l) Cancellation  of P.O.  
m) Posting in P.O.  Register  and Daily  Receipt  Register (on receipt  of 
material ) 
n) Posting in Receipt  Inspection  Report  (ISL No.)  
o) Preparation  of Rejection  Advice  
p) Preparation  of Receipt  Note and Receipt No.  
q) Generation  of requisition  
r) Issue  of materials   
s) Preparation  of Delivery  Note  
t) Depot  Transfer  and Book Transfer  
u) Preparation  Stock  Verification  Schedule  
v) Preparation  Stock  Verification  Report  
II) Reports  
Several reports  are being generated in iMM IS, categorised under EDP Reports, 
iMMIS Queries , IREPS  Queries, Queries (HQ ) and  Sales  Statistics  
a) EDP REPORTS  
i. M140 - Statements  
ii. Dr Cr – Summary  
iii. Class -Ledger  
iv. Price -Ledger  
v. Journal  –Slip 
vi. SINT -DT (Stores  in transit -Depot ): Store in Transit  
(Departmental ) 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
508 
For internal use of IA&AD  vii. SINT -PUR: Store in Transit  (Purchase ) 
viii. M128 -TOR  
ix. Posted -trans.  
x. Pur. Suspense  (Purchase  Suspense)  
xi. BAR  (Book Average  Rate)-Variation  
xii. Rcp/Iss Variance (Receipt /Issue  Variance)  
xiii. Stock  Master  
xiv. R/Note  List (Receipt  Note List)  
xv. Stock  Opening  
xvi. Stock  Sheets  
b) iMMIS -QUERY  
i. Online  NS demand  and Reqn Progress  –Progress of Online NS 
Deman ds and Requisitions  (Zone wise details of No. of Online and 
Manual  NS Demand , No. of Online and Manual Requisition , No. 
of Online and Manual Imprest ) 
ii. Item Position – Detail Position(History  Sheet , Stock , AAC , 
consumption  details, covered  due, uncovered  due) of any 
particular item in a zone  
iii. Stock -All-Rlys–Stock position of Railway  Units  
iv. List-Items – Filtered item listing  
v. Banned  Firms - Details of Firms banned by RB  
c) IREPS -QUERIES  
i. E-Auction -Progress  – Railway -wise/ Month -wise/ Depot -wise/ 
Year -wise Progress of e -Auction Implementation  
ii. E-Auction -Reports  –Catalogue  Register , Catalogue Sale  Register, 
Pending  Lot Status, Rejected  Rates , Bidder  Participation, Sold 
Rate, Bid  Sheet  Position, GST  Invoice, TCS  Certificate  
iii. IREPS -Progress  - Progress of Implementation of e -Procurement  
(No. of Tender  Published, Estd.  Value  of Tenders , No. o f P.O.s 
placed, Value of POs Placed during a specified period)  
iv. MSME  (Micro  Small and Medium Enterprises )-Firms - Progress  
of MSME Registration  Status  
d) QUERIES  (HQ ) 
PUR. QUERIES  (Purchase  query) -Following are purchase  Queries.  
i. Item- Position - Detail Position (History  Sheet , Stock , AAC , 
consumption  details, covered  due, uncovered  due) of any 
particular item in a zone  
ii. P.O. Search –Search details of Purchase  Order  
iii. Qty. Review – Quantity Review Sheet  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
509 
For internal use of IA&AD  i v . N.S. Demand -Status - Coverage Status of Non -Stock  Demands  
v. STK (Stock ) Demand  Status - Coverage Status of stock  Demands  
v i . CP (Contract  Period) Wise STK Demand -Status - CP-Wise 
Pending  Demands  
v i i . Vendor -Performance  
v i i i . File-Position - Position of a File/Tender /P.O.  
i x . Vendor -Search  – List of Vendors Registered  
x. DP (Delivery  Period) -Expiry – Purchase  Section  wise DP Expiry 
Report  
x i . P.O. Stats  – Industry wise/ MSME  unit wise/ Tender  Type wise 
summary of all types of P.O. viz. Direct  Purchase , Rate  Contract , 
Railway  Board  RGC/ Production  Unit/ Imports etc. M.A.  Search  
- Search PO Modifications  and Cancellations  
x i i . iMM IS- HQ-Progress  – Graphical repr esentation of Progress of 
IMM IS-HQ Module  
x i i i . Funds -Register  
x i v . Banned  Firms - Details of Firms banned by RB  
xv. RITES -Inspection  - Purchase  Order wise  Rites Inspection Status  
x v i . Funds  Position – Fund  Monitor  
x v i i . GeM  Orders - GeM Coverage PO Report  
DEP.  QUERIES  
i. Availability - Availability Status of Items  
ii. Availability - Monitoring  - Comparative  Position of Availability 
of Safety  Items  
iii. DRR  (Daily  Receipt  Register )-Status - Status of Receipt 
Accountal  
iv. Receipt - Status – R/Note  Status  
v. Stock - Master  – Depot , ward  wise Stock Balance  Report  
vi. All-Rly-Stock  - Stock Position of Railway  Units  
vii. Pending - Requisitions  - Depot , ward  wise Pending Requisitions  
viii. Inactive - Overstock  – Tabular and Graphical representation of 
Posit ion of Inactive Items (>12 Mths)  
ix. Inventory - Report  (New ) - Tabular and Graphical representation 
of Monthly  Reciepts, Issue  & Closing Balances  
x. Imprest  Monitor – Onlin e Imprest Monitoring  System  showing 
quarterly position of division wise, depot  wise and consignee  wise 
imprest  issue  
xi. Trans Query  (Transaction Que ry)–Depot  wise, Account  unit wise 
list of transactions  
xii. Inventory -Report  (Old) – Graphical Turn Over  Ration  (TOR ) 
Analysis  
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
510 
For internal use of IA&AD  xiii. Bin-Card  – Bin Card of a particular store  in a depot  
xiv. Inventory  Assistant  – Inventory Position of a particular store  in a 
depot  
RECEIPT QUERI ES 
i. DRR  (Daily  Receipt  Register )-Status - Status of Receipt 
Accountal  
ii. Receipt -Status - R/Note  Status  
iii. Item-Position - Detail Position (History  Sheet , Stock , AAC , 
consumption  details, covered  due, uncovered  due) of any 
particular item in a zone  
iv. File-Position - Position of a F ile/Tender /P.O.  
v. P.O. Search  - Search details of Purchase  Order  
vi. MA (Modification  Advice ) Search  - Search PO Modifications  and 
Cancellations  
vii. Vendor -Performance  
viii. R Note -Register  – Depot  wise Receipt  Note Register for a 
specified period  
ix. RITES - Insp. - Purchase  Order wise  Rites Inspection  Status  
e) Online  NS de mand  and Reqn Progress  - Progress of Online NS 
Demands  and Requisitions  (Zone wise de tails of No. of Online and 
Manual  NS Demand , No. of Online and Manual Requisition , No. of 
Online and Manual Imprest ) 
f) PLUS -Status  - Status of Stocking Proposals  
SALES STATISTICS  
i. Monthly -Disposal  
ii. Disposal -Report  
iii. RWF  (Rail  Wheel  Factory )-Dispatches  
iv. Sale-Comparison  
v. Latest -Position  
vi. Sale-Performance  
vii. Avg.  Rate 
viii. Qty. Disposal  
ix. Yr. Wise -Comparison  
x. R.S. Position  
xi. R.S. Monthly  
xii. Cash  Realisation  
xiii. Sale balances  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
511 
For internal use of IA&AD  6.3  Online  Bill Submission and Payment in IPAS  
The IREPS  and iMMIS  application  systems are interfaced with Integrated  Payroll  
& Accounting System  (IPAS ). After supplying and receiving of materials  from 
the firms/contractors  by the depot , the Depot  Officers issued the online  e-Receipts  
Note s through iMMIS application  system . Accord ingly, firms submit their bill 
online through IREPS application  system  along with relevant document i.e. e -
Receipt  Notes, Inspection  Certificate  (IC) etc. After submission of bill by firm, 
this bill reflects in the Co -6 register  of Store Account  in IPAS. The CO -6 clerk 
(Now in replaci ng it) forwards these bills  to the concerned dealing officials. The 
dealing official enters required mandatory field data and checks  all the parameters  
of bill like proper R -Note, IC, reimbursement  of GST , deducting I -Tax, liquidated  
damage , general damage, and any recovery noted in the recovery register , 
returning bill due to deficiency, BGs/FDRs, arithmetical  accuracy  of bill etc. 
Fulfilling all required parameters, this bill is passed & generated CO7  and 
submitted to SO /SSO  and concerned AFA  of final bill passing authority . Finally, 
the bill passing authority  forwards this CO7 to Book Section  for payment in this 
application  system  wherein all CO 7 reflects in the abstracts of CO7 under 
cheques  preparation. The Book Section of Store Account prepares online single 
cheque to SBI  for payment with party list of firms through RTGS  on hash 
generation Software  of SBI. (At present, bill submission only RITES  inspected 
bills of stock  items is online and it is requested that this online payment process 
may be seen in your railway  also).  In this application  following main 
reports/statements of Audit  importance, pertaining to Store Department  are as 
under;  
I) CO6 register  
II) CO7  Register  
III) Cheque Report  
IV) Abstract  of CO7  
V) Party -wise payment list  
VI) Cash  Book  
General -The audit  of stores  accounts  should be conducted in accordance with 
the programme  laid down in  the Secret  Memorandum , Revised  Audit  Norms  
2003,  keeping view the general principles  enunciated in Paras 2.5.1 -2.5.4 of MSO  
(Audit) , the rules  contained in the Indian  Railway  code for Stores  Department  
and instructions  issued by the DAI  from time  to time . 
 
 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
512 
For internal use of IA&AD  7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS - CHECK LIST  
(Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  Para 4.16 to 4.17 , Chapter 5 - Regulation of Audit  
and Account  (Amendments ) 2020. - “Para 35 & 36 (A udit of Stores  & Stocks) of 
Chapter 5 of Regulation on Audit & Accounts ” C&AG  of India  2020  PRACTICE  
GUIDE FOR AUDIT OF PROCUREMENT , PRACTICE  GUIDE FOR AUDIT 
OF CONTRACT MANAGEMENT)  
7.1 Stores  Budget  
The S tores  Budget  for the 'ensuing year' and the Revised  Estimate  for the c urrent 
year are prepared by the Principal  Chief  Material  Manager  with the assistance of 
the stores Accounts  Officer and submitted to the Railway  Board  by the 23rd 
December each year accompanied by Annexure 'A' (Statement showing the 
stocks at the commencement of the year, Estimated Receipts  and issued during 
the year and anticipated balance at the end of the year in respect of 26 major 
groups of stores), Annexure 'B' ( analysis of balance stores in stocks)  and 
Annexure 'C’ ( Demand No. 16 –Assets -Acquisition) being used for the purpose.  
In the Budget  Allotment  by the Ministry  sanct ioned the funds in each year for the 
Purchases of (i) Stores  for Capital  Works  ;(ii) Stores for works chargeable to the 
Depreciation Reserve  Funds; Development  Fund , Open Line  Works (Revenue ): 
and (iii) Stores required for general purposes.  
This lump -sum allotment are distributed by the General  Manager  between the 
several heads of sto res appearing in Form S. 506 (Annexure A to Form S. 3101). 
These distributions are intimated to the Stores  Accounts  Office for control over 
the commitments and expenditure  incurred as distributed over the  various heads.  
Audit  Check:-It should be seen in Audit: - 
I) The figures shown as the opening balance for the ensuing year is an 
estimated figure made up of :  
a) The estimated book value  of stores expected to be in stock at the e nd 
of the current year;  
b) The estimated net result of outstanding balance under the Stores  
suspense  heads of Purchases -imported , indigenous, sales, etc; and  
c) The amount expected to be outstanding in the stock Adjustment 
Account  after the accounts for the year are closed.  
II) Whether the expenditure  on stores purchased for specific 'works' that can 
be identified ab initio has been debited directly to the 'Works ' concerned 
and not passed through the general stores suspense  head.  
III) Whether the effects of modifications owing to changes in the programme 
of works on the Stores  Budget  are intimated to the Principal  Chief  
Material  Manager  as soon as they are carried out for submission to the 
Railway  Board  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
513 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Whether the value of materials budgeted under the head ‘Issue to capital 
Manufacture  Suspense ’ have been represented the value of materials 
likely to be drawn by the workshops  during the year for manufacturing 
different types of products as per the approved production  programme of 
Production  Units and this have been assessed adopting the latest book 
average  rates available at the time of preparation of the budget  
V) Whether the Miscellaneous  Advance Cap ital represented issues of stores 
for fabrication  etc 
VI) Whether the average  consumption of the last three years after allowing 
for special items of expenditure  the figure have been adopt ed for the 
budget in ‘Issues to Revenue ’. Deviation on above have been brought to 
the notice of the Principal  officers concerned by the controller of stores in 
order to decide the figure to be finally adopted for the budge t. 
VII) Whether the value of scrap  and surplus  stock has been taken into account 
in estimating the closing balance of store in stock, at the end of the year . 
VIII) Whether the value of stores to be purchased and paid during the year for 
ultimate issue to works which cannot be identified ab -initio  have only 
been included under the head ‘stores Suspense ’. 
IX) Whether the value of stores to be purchased and paid during the year for 
ultimate issue to the shop fo r production  of new Rolling  Stock  against 
Rolling stock budget orders have been included under the head ‘stores 
Suspense ’. (This will apply only to Production  Units and th e Railways  
who are executing Rolling Stock Budget  orders for manufacture of certain 
new Rolling Stock.).  
X) Whether the value of stores to be purchased and paid for ultimate issue to 
Coach  and Wagon  Builders  (in Private and Public  Sector) for the purpose 
of building new Rolling  stock have been included under the head ‘stores 
Suspense ’, (steel, bought out components, etc. which are procur ed and 
kept under stores suspense  for ultimate issue to these builders should only 
be included).  
XI) Whether the brief narrative explanations of the difference between the 
opening and closing balances have been given.  
XII) Whether the special feat ures in the estimates have been brought out 
clearly and a full explanation thereof furnished, indicating the amount 
involved in respect of each item in the debit  and credit  side. 
7.1.1 Inventory  Man agement  
Materials  play a vital role in Indian Railways ’ operation, maintenance and in 
house production  activities. Materials Management  involves timely availability  
of stores to the users and it comprises different stages viz; planning  and 
programming, purchasing, inventory  control including, inter -alia, receiving and 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
514 
For internal use of IA&AD  allocation , warehousing, transportation, mater ial handling and disposal of scrap . 
A successful inventory management  enhances user satisfaction by making 
available the right quantity of materials at the right time, without unnecessary 
blocking up of capital.  
Theoretical ly, if supplies of materials can be so arranged as to meet exactly the 
operational needs for day to day, there will hardly be any need for keeping 
inventory . It is impossible to obtain material with zero time lags. To overcome 
the fluctua tion of supply and demand, inventories are to be maintained. Inventory  
serves as a cushion and protects the system against the fluctuation of demand and 
supply.  
Low inventories will result in payment of less interest charges on capital lo cked 
up and also release the much wanted and same capital for alternative uses. It is in 
the interest of organization to keep inventory  holding at the lowest possible level 
meeting the operational requirement of day to day activities. Inv entory  
management  on Indian Railways  may save thousands of crore of rupees from 
being invested in materials.  
Audit  checks - It should be seen in Audit: - 
I) Whether complete list of items requ ired as well as available are being 
maintained by depot  concerned.  
II) Whether all the items available in the Stores  Depot have been verified by 
Stock  Verifiers of the Accounts  Department at regular i nterval.  
III) Whether there is mismatch between physical  and financial  outturn of 
inventory  balances of various production  units.  
IV) Whether there was any blockage of fund and wastage of mater ial due to 
excess production  beyond approved production programme.   
V) Whether spares and other issues from production  units match with the 
physical  outturns of production units.  
VI) Whether there was any b lockage of fund and wastage of material due to 
excess procurement  of materials.   
7.1.2 Vendor Development  Cell 
Each Railway /Production  Unit should have a separate cell  consi sting of stores 
and technical officers for purpose of vendor  development. This cell shall lay 
down norms for development , inspect firms for their approval, review the 
vendors based on quality performance  of materials sup plied, upgrade vendors 
from development to regular status and vice versa etc. The Vendor Development  
cell will have the responsibility of gathering information on quality of various 
products from consignees, RDSO , pre-inspe ction agencies and suppliers. The cell 
will be responsible for scrutinising the records for the purposes of ensuring 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
515 
For internal use of IA&AD  quality products assessment of vendor performance rating  etc., and coordination 
with the firms, RDSO etc if the supplies are  not as per the required quality norms.  
Audit  Checks  - It may be seen in Audit: - 
I) Whether any norms have been devised for Vendor development.  
II) Whether it act as a coordinator between firms, RDSO  etc if the supplies 
are not as per required quality norms.  
III) Whether upgradation and downgradation of firms from development to 
regular status and vice versa is being done.  
7.1.3 Vendor approval  
The purpose of approving vendors for safety and vital items is to ensure quality. 
The exercise of vendo r approval is conducted independently by the following 
units: - 
RDSO : - Mechanical  items, components, sub - assemblies related to various 
types of rolling stock. A large number of items used for signalling and telecom 
infrastructure  over Indian Railways . Certain track fitting items used in track 
structures of various types over Indian railways. Various electrical fittings, 
components and sub -assemblies.  
DLW  & CLW:-Various electrical & mechanical items, components, sub - 
assemblies related to various types of Diesel  and Electric  Locomotive  stocks.  
MCF , ICF  & RCF :-Various electrical & mechanical Items, components, sub - 
assemblies used in manufacturing of coaches of various types dealt by respective 
manufacturing units.  
CORE :- Various electrical fittings primarily used in connection of electrification 
works. 
The approval of sources are to be done after ensuring acceptable Quality  
Assurance Plan ( QAP),  technical capability, manufacturing of quality product, 
adequately testing equipment for maintaining quality standard, capacity and 
financial  status.  
Approval of vendors in the approved list of suppliers should be for a limited 
period of two years (at a time). The performance  of the approved sources with 
respect to quality supplies will be the responsibili ty of the approving authority 
who will systematically monitor the quality norms so that quality of supplies is 
as per specification and are of highest standard. The vendors whose quality is 
suspect will be systematically weeded out.  
 
 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
516 
For internal use of IA&AD  Audit  Checks  - It may be seen in Audit: - 
I) Whether the approved list of vendors are prepared by the expert team after 
ensuring acceptable QAP,  technical capability, manufacturing of quality 
product, adequately testing equipment for maintaining quality standard, 
capacity and financial  status.  
II) Whether Approving authority systematically monitor the quality norms 
so that supplies is as per specification and are of highest standard.  
III) Whether vendors whose quality is a suspect is systematically weeded out . 
7.1.4 Vendor Registration  
Trade group wise vendor  registration  process of Indian Railways  provides a 
system for registering capable vendors with Railways. This serves the purpose of 
having vendor base for ma naging an efficient procurement  system. Railway  
procures all items online  through e -tender mode on Indian Railway Electronic 
Procurement System (IREPS). Registration with IREPS is prerequisite for doing 
business with Railways.  
An unified web  portal  for registration  of Vendors for all Indian Railways ’ Vendor 
Approving Units including RDSO  i.e. “Unified Vendor Approval Module ” 
(UVAM) hosted on ‘www.ireps .gov.in’ website has been made functional w.e.f. 
04.05.2021.  
Audit  Checks  – It should be seen :- 
I) Whether the firms who are registered for supply of orders valued above 
Rs. 10 lakhs are manufactu rers. 
II) Whether the firms who are registered for supply of orders above Rs. 50 
lakhs are manufacturer and are pre -inspected by an Officer of the rank of 
Junior Administrative rank for assessing capacity -cum-capability.   
III) Whether monetary limit for registrati on of trade groups was taken, 
(whichever is higher) at 30% of the average  annual turnover  for last three 
completed financial  years or the highest value of order successfully 
executed i n the last three completed financial years with Railways . 
IV) Whether ISO  certified firms was considered by Railways /Production  
Units/RDSO  for fresh registration /renewal of registration in case of high 
value supplies/procurement  as well as procurement of vital & safety 
items.  
7.1.5 Vendor rating  
The vendor  rating  system provide a transparent system, using which decision can 
be taken to dispense with field visits for re -assessment. The rating system can be 
utilized as other decision making tools also.  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
517 
For internal use of IA&AD  The vendor  rating  system are decided keeping cost of vendor rating system vis a 
vis anticipated returns and other factors in view. The rating system are based on 
four key factors viz Quality , Delivery, Service and System . RITES  / RDSO  
inspect most of the railway materials and they have comp lete knowledge of the 
contracts placed, deliveries made, stage, final inspection results, quantities 
rejected during manufacture or at the consignee's end. Therefore these agencies 
have the necessary information required for vendor ratings  
The Vendor Ratin g are done based on following three criteria:  
I) Quality  performance  of vendor : Based on Quality of Products produced 
during the period under consideration  
II) Delivery Performance of Vendor:  Based on supply pe rformance  of 
vendor  against orders within delivery Period  
III) Service & System performance  of vendor : Based on General  
Performance such as reassessment, updating infrastruct ure etc. and 
maintenance of Quality  control systems.  
The financial  year shall be kept as period for evaluation. The performance  for 
period April -March shall be evaluated and fina lized by June every year for the 
previous financial year.  
The information to be obtained from consignee shall be collected through on line 
portals every month, so that data is not skewed and is available. Considering firms 
are assessed for system / techni cal requirement before approval/registration  and 
majority of products manufactured for railway use are inspected at the time of 
supply the following weightage is considered: - 
Quality  Performance : 50%   
Delivery Performance : 35%  
Service & System Performance : 15%  
Audit  Check  - It should be seen in Audit as follows: - 
I) Whether each vendor  have been classified into three classes viz; A 
(Rating obtained more than 90), B (Rating obtained above 75 to 90), C 
(Rating obtained below 75).   
II) The vendors who maintain A rating  throughout the period of approval, the 
validity may be extended for next period of approval (once) without nee d 
for field visit by officers. Subsequent renewal needs to done as per extant 
procedure.  
III) The validity of vendors not extended for C class vendor  throughout the 
period of approval.  
IV) If there are no improvement in second and subsequent year, firm with ‘C’ 
class rating  are delisted from Vendor List.  
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
518 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.1.6 Turn Over Ratio  
To ensure continuous availability of stores to user departments  while kee ping the 
stock levels at optimum  level is one of the important objectives of Stores  
Department. Efficiency with regard to optimum stock levels is measured by 
working out inventory  turnover  ratio on every 31st March, which is worked out 
as under:  
Inventory  Turn Over Ratio = (Total inventory  balances in Rupees on 31st 
March)  * 100                                                                                                     
(Total value of stores issued during the year)  
The target for inventory  turnover  ratio is generally kept around 15%. The 
efficiency  with regards to servi ce is worked out by compiling compliance 
percentage of materials against all requisitions received in Stores  Department. 
The target for compliance is kept between 95% to 98%. For vital and safety items, 
the compliance is aimed at 100%.  
In order to keep inventory  turnover  ratio and compliance figure at optimum  level, 
selective inventory management  method is used on Indian Railways . 
Classificat ion of items are made in A B C category as well as vital, essential and 
desirable category. All high consumption value items which represent 70% of 
total annual usage value are classified as ‘A’ Category , items which represent 
further 20% of total usage value are classified as ‘B’ category and remaining 
items representing 10% consumption value are classified as ‘C’ category.  
Audit  Checks - It should be seen in Audit: - 
I) It should be seen that whether Inventory  turnover  ratio and classification  
of items in A B C category are done correctly.  
II) Whether all issues from all the depots during the year were summed up to 
arrive at the total issue value (in Rupees) of t he Railway .   
III) Whether all the items are sorted in descending sequence of their issue 
value in the entire Railway  (i.e. after adding issues of all individual 
depots).  
IV) Whether the issue value of the items summed up to cumulati ve issue value 
counter representing 70 percent of total issues and same classified as ‘A’ 
category items.  After further adding issue value of an item to "cumulative 
issue value" counter, value in the counter is equal to 90% of total issues, 
we mark all ite ms excluding “A” category items to the last item as "B" 
category items,  
V) Whether the remaining items are classified as "C" category items.  
 
 
 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
519 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.1.7 Quality  Assurance  
RDSO  and Production  Units/Railways  review the drawings and specifications to 
introduce identification marks of suppliers and month/year of manufacture so that 
materials, in the actual use can be traced to the suppliers for premature failures.  
Audit  Check  
I) Whether the Inspe ction  Certificate issued by the pre -inspecting agency 
contain  the test result c onducted by them as quality assu rance.  
II) Whether the specification and manufacturing processes was discussed 
with manufacturers when  laid down specification/d esired quality levels 
was not achieved.  
III) Whether the nominated source approving agencies, like 
RDSO /CLW /DLW /ICF had initiated such dialogues after suitably 
identifying the items causing failures.  
7.1.8 Non-moving Items  
Items which have no issues for last 12 months, and stocks exists are called 
inactive or non -moving  items. Those may be considered as surplus  to the 
requirements of the railway only if they have not been issued for a  long time. 
Even amongst such items there may be some which it is known could be utilized 
for the purpose of the railway in the near future, and these may be with advantage 
be distinguished from the surplus stores which cannot be so consumed.  
  Audit  Check - It should be seen in Audit: - 
I) Inactive or non -moving  items which have not been issued from stock for 
railway consumption, for a period of two years have only been considered 
as surplus  stock.  
II) Whether Such "surplus " stock further been classified under t wo heads viz.  
a. movable surplus  (which have possibility of use in near future) and  
b. dead  surplus  (which it is considered are not likely to be utilized  on any 
railway within the next two years).  
III) Whether the inactive/dead  surplus  stores items placed before the survey 
committee for being declared as scrap . 
7.2 Review of Purchase  Order Files  
Purchase  Orders  are the instrument  to place orders on the firms for supply  of 
stores  placed either by the Principal  Chief  Material  Manager  (PCMM ) or by the 
Depot  Officer of the Main Depot.  
Generally,  Purchase  Orders  are placed for stock  items and non -stock  items.   
Stock  items: - Such Items will be kept in the custody of the Stores  Department  
which are frequently and regularly required and whose unit  cost justifies 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
520 
For internal use of IA&AD  incurring inventory  carrying cost  associated with these items. Such items will be 
known as 'Stock' items.   
Non-stock  items: - All items other than 'stock ' items will be called "Non -stock ” 
items. These items may, however, be described in the Standard  Nomenclature  
List. No purchase  of such items will be made for stock  purposes.   
Stores  can be purcha sed through different tendering  system : 
The "OPEN " Tender  System  —This system  of invitation to tender  in the most 
open and public  manne r possible, should be used as a general rule and must be 
adopted.  
The "Limited " Tender  System  —In case of procurement  in emergency  and in 
case of procurement  of items whose approved  list of vendor  is issued by 
centralised agency , this system  may ordinarily be adopted when it is considered 
to be advantageous.  
The "Single " Tender  System —This system  may be adopted with regard to 
small orders in the case of non -proprietary articles  and in case of proprietary  
articles  (with PAC  'a' certificate ) and articles  in the process of indigenous 
development  subject to the rates quoted being reasonable.  
After inception of IREPS , firms are required to be registered in IREPS and 
Purchase  Order are being placed on the registered firms only.  
The policy  underlying the rules  governing purchase  of stores  as contained in 
chapters  III—XI of the Indian  Railway  Code  for the Stores  Department , Vol. I  is 
to make the purchases of stores  for public  service  in such a way as to encourage 
the development  of the industries of the country to the utmost possible extent 
consistent with economy  and efficiency  and with this end in view the order in 
which preference is to be given in making purchases has been laid  down as 
under: - 
I) Articles  which are produced in the form of raw materials  or manufactured 
in India  from indigenous raw materials . 
II) Articles  fully or partially manufactured indigenously from imported  
material . 
III) Articles  of foreign  manufacture held in stock  in India . 
IV) Articles  manufactured abroad which need to be specially imported . 
The other important rules  laid down for  observance are that (1) except in certain 
stated circumstances all articles  required to be purchased shall be purchased on 
the condition that delivery shall be made in India  for payment in rupees in India 
and (2) the normal procedure for placing orders for purchases shall be through 
open tenders  invited in India and abroad  also when considered desirable.  
 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
521 
For internal use of IA&AD  During Audit  of Purchase  Orders , following should b e seen:  
I) For import  of stores , whether tenders  were floated after obtaining 
necessary indigenous clearance from Director  General  of Technical  
Development  (DGTD )/Department  of Electronics and release of 
foreign  exchange ? 
II) Whether the Railways ’ proposals to the Railway  Board  for release of 
foreign  exchange  required for financing the import  have duly taken 
into account  the relative importance and priority of the work  for which 
the material s are proposed to be imported  so as to ensure that more 
important and priority works  do not suffer for want of foreign  
exchange?  
III) Whether materials  after remained unused for long rendering blockage 
of valuable foreign  exchange  which could otherwise be utilised for 
other deserving purposes/works ? 
IV) Whether price preference allowed, if any, for encouraging 
development  of indigenous industries is in accordance with the guide 
lines issued by the Bureau  of Public  Enterprises  based on Government  
purchase  policy  and that such price preference is not allowed to 
continue as a matter of course even after indigenous manufacture of 
the items in question has been fully established ? 
V) In high  value contracts  for supply  of stores  where the raw material  
content like steel, nonferrous etc. is substantial.  Whether a pre -
determined price variation clause with an upper ceiling for the total 
variation during the currency  of the contract  is prescribed  in the  tender  
enquiry itself so as to obtain competitive offers and avoid future 
claims from the contractors  on account  of increase i n raw material  
prices?  
VI) Whether a suitable de -escalation  clause is provided in the contracts  
along with escalation  clause, if any, so that in the event of the 
contractors  procuring inputs  at lower prices than those provided in the 
contracts , the resulting benefits may accrue to the Railways ? 
VII) Where contract  prices are settled taking into account  the assistance 
from the Railways  by way of issue  of any input at fixed  prices, 
whether suitable safeguards are provided in the contracts  so that in the 
event of contractors  procuring the inputs  from outside sources  at lower 
prices so that the resulting benefits may accrue to the Railways?  
VIII) In case of purchases on single tender  basis either because the articles  
in ques tion are proprietary  and/or manufactured by a single firm, 
whether (i) Proprietary  certificates are issued, not as a matter of 
course, but only after adequate exploratory action  to locate alternative 
sources has proved ab ortive, and (ii) for items which are monopoly of 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
522 
For internal use of IA&AD  single and /or a limited number of firms steps are taken to develop 
alternative sources of supply  so as to generate competition in price?  
IX) In the cases of purchase  of materials  without calling for tenders , 
whether sufficient reasons leading to the decision not to call for the 
tenders  were recorded?  
X) Whether for each article or class of article quantities which should be 
kept in st ock was prescribed  based on the frequency  and extent of the 
demand, the nature of article, its recoupment  period, due margin of 
safety , no prima facie unnecessary accumula tion of stores  and 
consequent locking up of capital ? 
XI) Whether purchases of articles  frequently required are made in 
unnecessarily small and frequent batches? Whether periodically the 
total quantity likely to b e required is determined and obtained after 
taking into consideration the stock  in hand  and the expected 
consumption  for such items?  
XII) Whether there was any undue  tendency on the part of the execut ive 
authorities  to specify particular make of articles  or particular firms for 
their purchases resulting in restricting the field of competition?  
XIII) Whether stores  purchased for constructio n of rolling stock  and special  
works  are obtained unduly far in advance of the time  when they are 
likely/actually to be required? Similarly, whether the transfer of 
mater ials left over, if any, on completion  of the specific works  issued 
to some other works  and necessary cost  adjustments  are unduly 
delayed?  
XIV)  Speculative purchase s for long periods or merely against rise in price 
are to be deprecated. Any clear and important instances coming to 
notice especially when resulting in loss  should be pointed out.  
XV) Whether detailed recording/documentation  procedures of all 
procurement  exist?  
XVI)  Whether demands for stores  received from different wings/units  were 
clubbed together so as to reap the benefits of bulk buying?  
XVII)  Whether requirements were intentionally b ifurcated/ split so as to 
avoid approval  from higher authorities ? 
XVIII)  Whether certificate  of sufficient fund for non -stock  procurement  was 
furnished?  
XIX)  Whether reasonable  time was allowed for submission of tender  in 
order to receive sufficient responses from the competent  suppliers ? 
XX) In cases where Limited  Tender  Enquiry  was adopted even where 
estimated value was more than permissible limit, was there a 
certification  by the competent  authority  that the demand was urgent, 
the nature of the urgency, the reasons  why the procurement  could not 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
523 
For internal use of IA&AD  be anticipated and that the additional  expenditure  involved in not 
procuring through advertised tender  was justified in view of urgency?  
XXI)  Whether detail ed justification  was given/ recorded for propriety  
purchases and selecting a single vendor ? 
XXII)  Whether there is any vendor  development  cell in the zone?  
XXIII)  Whe ther firms registered as approved  suppliers  in IREPS , done 
carefully, after assessing the capacity cum capability and financial  
standing, credentials, manufacturing capability, quality  control  
systems, past performance , after sales  service , financial  background 
etc. of the firm, using the services of specialized agencies like 
Research  Design  and Standards  Organisation (RDSO ), Lucknow?  
XXIV)  Whether a tender  committee  was properly constituted, associated with 
finance and tender  was duly examined by the committee ?  
XXV)  Whether decisions/deliberations of individuals / Tender  Committee  
been properly documented  so that accountability can be fixed  if 
serious lapses are established ? 
XXVI)  Whether technical  bids were evaluated by the competent  authority  at 
the first stage?  
XXVII)  Whether financial  bids were considered only af ter a technical  bid was 
found acceptable?  
XXVIII)  Whether rate  analysis  was done in a realistic and objective  manner on 
the basis of prevailing market rate , last purchase  prices, economic  
indices  for raw material /labour  and other input costs etc.?  
XXIX)  Whether comparison  of rates with other zones procuring similar 
commodities  was done through the information available in iMM IS? 
XXX)  Whether last purchase  rate (LPR ) of past successfully executed orders 
of similar magnitude and scope  of supply , used as an input for 
assessing rates?  
XXXI)  Was the tender  finalized within the initial validity of offer?  
XXXII)  Whether during any post  tender  negotiation CVC  guidelines  were 
followe d? Was negotiation done with other than L -I? 
XXXIII)  Whether in case the quantity to be ordered was much more than what 
L-I alone could supply , the quantity order was distributed in a fair, 
transparent  and equitable  manner?  
XXXIV)  In the case of awarding of P.O.  to a bidder  other than the lowest 
bidder,  whethe r the reason was recorded and the reason was justified?  
XXXV)  Where a price variation clause is provided, whether the price agreed 
upon has s pecified the base level viz. the month  and year to which the 
price is linked, to enable variations being calculated with reference to 
the price levels prevailing in that month  and year?  
XXXVI)  Whether a formula for calculation of the p rice variation has been 
incorporated in the P.O.  documents ? 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
524 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXXVII)  Whether there is a clause stipulating a minimum percentage  of 
variation of the contract  price above which price variations will b e 
admissible?  
XXXVIII)  Whether necessary earnest money / security  deposit  has been 
obtained?  
XXXIX)  Whether the validity of the Bank  Guarantee , if warranted, was  
monitored, and in case of  extensions in delivery period, whether the 
BG was appropriately extended?  
XL) Whether technical  advice wherever necessary was obtained and 
financial  implications of alternate specifications  of deliver y period 
was examined?  
XLI) Whether acceptance of the tender  and execution  of necessary 
agreement was done by the competent  authority ? 
XLII)  Whether contract  was entered into partie s who had been black listed ? 
XLIII)  Whether the quantity ordered was as per genuine requirements with 
regard to estimate / indents  based on consumption  and stock  position?  
XLIV)  Whet her liquidated  damages  clause due to loss , inconvenience 
suffered for delayed supply  was incorporated in the contract ? 
XLV)  Whether the scope  of Option  Clause  was incorporated in the contract ? 
XLVI)  Whether Option  Clause  was executed for benefit of Railways ? 
Further, for purchase  of rolling stock  and their component, track  materials  e.g. 
rails, sleepers etc., which are being procured by Railway  Board , following checks  
may be done  
I) Whether payments for supplies by the nominated FA&CAOs  are in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the contracts ? 
II) Whether the materials  offered by the firms and passed by the inspection  
authority  i.e. RITES  or other organisation  for the Railway  Board ’s 
contracts , have been found to be substandard and/or not conforming to 
specification by the consignee  Railways  and the adequacy or otherwise of 
the action  taken in such cases for obtaining replacements with materials  
of requisite standard  
III) Whether the defects /deficiencies  in the equipment /materials  noticed 
during the warranty  period are promptly reported to the suppliers  and the 
Railway  Board  for enfor cing warranty  claims?  
IV) Whether loss , inconvenience etc. suffered, if any, by the consignee  
Railways  due to delayed supplies is reported to the Railway  Board  to 
enable invoking liquidated  damages  clause of the contract ? 
V) Whether the short/delayed supplies against the running  contracts  and the 
consequent direct  emergency  purchases by the Railways  are due to short 
indenting on account  of incorrect assessment  of requirements or to 
defaults on the part of the contractors ? 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
525 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Whether the emergency  purchases resorted to at higher rates from the 
same firms who defaulted in supply  against the running  contracts  have 
been reported to Railway  Board  for appropriate  action  against the 
defaulting  suppliers ? 
7.3 Review of Completed Contract s 
In addition to the checks  prescribed  for Purchase  Orders , following checks  may 
be exercised for completed contracts  
I) Whether delivery was made within the scheduled Delivery  Period? If not, 
wheth er appropriate  liquidated  damage  was recovered?  
II) If no liquidated  damage  was recovered for late  supply  of stores , whether 
approval  of the competent  authority  was taken for such waival?  
III) Whether all items were accepted or rejected ? 
IV) In the case of rejection , whether proper action  was initiated to realize the 
due?  
V) If there was delay in lifting of rejected  materials  by the contractor, 
whether appropriate  ground  rent was realized?  
VI) Whether there was any variation between the quantity received and 
quantity mentioned in the P.O. ? 
VII) Whether the inspection  certificate  of the inspecting authority  as stipulated 
in the P.O.  was take n? 
VIII) When materials  offered by the firms were found to be sub -standard and/ 
or not conforming to the specification whether adequate action  was taken 
for obtaining replacements with materials  of requisite sta ndard?  
IX) Whether defects / deficiencies  in the equipment / materials  noticed during 
the warranty  period were promptly reported to the suppliers  for enfo rcing 
warranty  claims?  
X) Whether the quantity checked by the inspecting authority  was same as 
quantum to be inspected stipulated in the P.O. ?  
XI) Whether Security  Deposit  was relea sed? 
7.4 Security  Deposit  
Security  Deposit  is a percentage  deduction from the periodic payments made on 
account  of work  done or supply  made. In case of purchase  Security Deposit is in 
the form of Bank  Guarantee  or Fixed  Deposit. A register  should be maintained 
for recording the receipt  and return of all security  deposits with the description of 
the contract . 
During Audit  of Security  Deposit  and Security Deposit Register , following 
should be se en: 
I) Whether the validity of the Bank  Guarantee , if received as security  
deposit , was monitored, and in case of extensions in delivery period, 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
526 
For internal use of IA&AD  whether the BG was appropriately extended?  
II) Whethe r the items to procured, as mentioned in the P.O. , has been 
received by the consignee / depot  before release of Security  Deposit ? 
III) In case of advance payment whether the proof of d ispatch, mode of 
transport  etc. were received?   
IV) Whether the Bank  Guarantee / Fixed  Deposit , received as Security  Deposit 
was a legal  document?  
V) Whe ther the approval  of the competent  authority  was taken before release 
of Security  Deposit ? 
VI) In the case of exemption of Security  Deposit , proper documentation  and 
approval  of the competent  authority  was taken?  
7.5 Bills  
7.5.1 Stores  Bills  (Through purchase  and Purchase  from other agencies)  
Payments of  purchase  have been made through Store bill.  Store bills  are being 
prepared in IPAS . After placement of purchase  order by awarding the contract  
and receiving the materials  by the consignee  as per laid  down rules  & procedure, 
the firm submits the bill for payment through IREPS  with all required 
attachments.  On submission of bill by firm, this bill reflects in the CO6 register  
of IPAS application  system  and CO6 clerk forwards this bill to concerned dealing 
officials for passing & payment. For more detail thi s may be seen para 6.3. 
During Audit  of Stores  Bills , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the expenditure  was sanctioned  by competent  authority ? 
II) Whether proper postings are made in Purchase  Accounts  register  and 
Priced Ledgers / Transaction Register ? 
III) Whether the particulars agree with the purchase  orders and the accepted 
tenders  as regards the rates, the date of supply  and the quantity to be 
supplied?  
IV) Whether the receipt  of stores  has been duly acknowledged?  
V) Whether arithmetical  calculations are correct?  
VI) Whether due precaution have been taken to guard against the passing of a 
second claim for the same stores ? 
VII) In the case of stores  purchased in India , the Funds  Register  (vide Para 
506-S), or any other document used for watching the progress of 
purchases agai nst grants, should be reviewed as prescribed . 
VIII) While auditing  the stores  bills the relevant receipt  notes  should be linked.  
IX) Whether the quality  and quantity of stores  received were measured  by the 
responsible official/ officer?  
X) When materials  offered by the firms were found to be sub -standard and/ 
or not conforming to the specification whether adequa te action  was taken 
for obtaining replacements with materials  of requisite standard?  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
527 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Whether defects / deficiencies  in the equipment /materials  noticed during 
the warranty  period were promptly reported to the suppliers  for enforcing 
warranty  claims?  
XII) Whether proforma invoice  was gathered before release of 95/ 98 per cent  
of paymen t? 
XIII) Whether the inspection  certificate  of the inspecting authority  as stipulated 
in the P.O.  was taken?  
XIV)  Whether delivery was made within the scheduled delivery period? If not, 
whether app ropriate  liquidated  damage  was recovered?  
XV) If no liquidated  damage  was recovered for late  supply  of stores , whether 
approval  of the competent  authority  was taken for such waival?  
XVI)  Whether taxes , duties and other statutory  charges  were properly 
recovered?  
XVII)  Whether stores  were delivered to the consignee  mentioned in the P.O. ? 
7.5.2 Port  & Customs  Charges  
Payment of port  charges  is made by the port  commissioner  from the imprest  held 
by them from the Railway  and the same is recouped when necessity arises. 
Custom  duties are paid by the Accounts  Department .  
During Audit  of Port  & Custom  Charges , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the bills  were countersigned by the Controller  of Stores ? 
II) Whether proper allocation  was made?  
III) Whether the details of the bills  (for custom charges ) agree with those in 
the bills  of lading and tonnage  statement?  
IV) Whether the rates charged in the bills  for customs  charged agree with 
schedule  of rates of the customs  Department ? 
V) Whether the quantity received as stated in P.O. ? If differ, whether the 
charges  paid for the quant ity received or for the quantity mentioned in the 
P.O.?  
VI) Whether the consignment released within the free  time? If not whether 
any penalty  was levied by the port  authorities ? If so, whether any 
responsibility was fixed ? 
VII) Whether the insurance  charges  were included to arrive at the CIF value?  
VIII) It should be ensured that the classification  of material  has been made 
correctly and discrepancies, if any, pursued.  
7.6 Receipt  Return  
7.6.1 Receipt  Return - Returned  Stores  
All stores  which have been previously issued for the services of the r ailway  and 
are no longer required on a work  should, in the absence of special  instructions  to 
the contrary, be returned to the designated stores  depots  suitable  for the final 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
528 
For internal use of IA&AD  disposal  of the returned stores , either by reissue to consumers, or by reclamation , 
or sale by auction, as the case may be.  
During Audit  of receipt  of Returned  Stores , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the rate  at whic h credit  was afforded to works  as reasonable?  
II) Whether any formula was prescribed  for valuation  of second hand  
materials  and the adjustments  were correct according to the formula?  
III) Whether the allocation  of credit  was correct?  
IV) Whether the returned stores  were properly taken into account  in the priced 
ledger / transaction register ? 
V) When materials  were returned as new / second hand  were accepted by the 
Store D epartment  as second hand  or scrap , whether the differences were 
reconciled? The reasons for the differences may also be investigated.  
VI) Whether proper assessment  of quantity and value of the re turned stores  
was done?  
VII) Whether approval  of the competent  authority  was taken at the time  of 
returning of stores ? 
VIII) Whether materials  were retur ned within reasonable time ? 
IX) Whether the quantity of stores  returned by the returning department was 
different than that received by Stores  Department ?  
X) Whether initial documents  coming under audit  scrutiny were free  from 
irregularities , such as improper corrections, erasures, stamped signatures , 
interpolations etc. and that all corrections of whatever nature we re 
initialled  by the competent  authority ? 
7.6.2 Receipt  Return - Workshop  Outturn  
During Audit  of receipt  of Workshop  Outturn , following should be seen:  
I) Whether proper requisition was there for stores  to be manufactured in 
workshop?  
II) Whether priced issue  notes  agree with the requisitions?  
III) Whether the materials  received were properly acknowledged?  
IV) Whether the materials  received were entered in the ledgers ? 
V) Whether the total of the issue  notes  was posted into the stores  journal? 
VI) Where the manufactured articles  are issued at a fixed  rate, it should be 
seen that the difference between the actual cost  of manufacture and the  
amount debited  through the issue  notes  is adjusted properly.  
VII) Whether the difference between the amounts debited  on the "Materials  
Supplied to Stores " Form at the time  of issue  and the actual out -turn cost  
as subsequently worked out by the Workshop  Accounts  Office  in 
periodical  statement were reconciled and adjusted as prescribed  for in 
paragraphs  1534 -A and 1534 -B of Indian  Railway  Code  for Stores 
Department ? 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
529 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.6.3 Receipt  Returns - Imported  Stores  
During Audit  of receipt  of imported  stores , following should be seen:  
I) Whether indents  for imported  stores  for general purpose or for ordinary 
works  were placed with the purchasing agency  (Store Department  of 
Zonal  Railway  and/ or Railway Board )? 
II) Whether the work  for which indent  was placed was included in the works , 
machinery and rolling stock  programme  as approved  by Railway  Board ? 
III) Whether sufficient funds were available from the sanctioned  allotment of 
the year?  
IV) Whether payments to the suppliers  were  made or reimbursement  claims 
from authorized banks were accepted on the basis of the bill of lading , 
inspection  certificate  etc.? 
V) Whether letter of credit  was made operative before the Performance  
Guarantee  Bond as stipulated in the contract  was furnished by the 
supplier?  
VI) Whether the bill of lading  was prepared prior to inspection  of the material  
by the inspection authority ? 
VII) Whether payments are allowed against bill of lading  antedated to 
inspection ? 
VIII) Whether the reimbursement  claim of the bank  as accepted by the 
FA&CAOs  was a proper charge against the Railways  and has been 
correctly adjusted in accounts ? 
IX) Whether items in the Invoice Distribution  Statements agree with the 
references  made in the indents , the advice of despatches, the receipts  by 
the depots  and the postings into the priced ledgers /transaction registers ? 
7.6.4 Receipt  Returns - Inter Depot  Transfers  
During Audit  of receipt  of inter depot  transfers, following should be seen:  
I) Whether the receipts  were correctly priced at the same rate  at which the 
corresponding issue  vouchers  were evaluated?  
II) Whether the issues and receipts  are paired and sufficient action  is taken 
to watch the acknowledgement  of outstanding  items?  
III) If receipts  and issues are not paired during the month , whether it is 
reflected in the “Stores -in-transit (Depot  transfer)”?  
IV) Whether requisitions for stores  were approved  by the competent  
authority ? 
V) Whether the necessity of the material  was properly spelled out?  
VI) Whether m aterial  was taken into account  by the consignee  depot  and the 
verified copies of the challans were returned as a proof of 
acknowledgement  of the stores ?  
VII) Whether the material  was actually utilized by the consignee  depot  within 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
530 
For internal use of IA&AD  the accounting period?  
7.6.5 Receipt  Returns –Other Receipts  
Other receipts  cover stores  received on loan from other Railways  and fabricated/ 
reconditioned or repaired stores  received from contractors . 
During Audit  of other receipts , following sh ould be seen:  
I) In the case of stores  received on loan from other Railways , whether 
instructions  regarding pricing and return of such stores  were observed?  
II) In the case of fabrication  receipt  note, whether materials  were valued at 
the rates at which they were originally issued plus the fabrication  charges ?  
III) Whether the materials  received  was taken into account ? 
IV) Whether necessary postings were made in the Misc . Advance  Capital  
Statement (for fabricated stores ) or Deposit  Misc. Statement ( Stores  
received on loan)?  
7.7 Delivery  Notes  
7.7.1 Delivery  Notes  - Issues  to Revenue  and Capital  
During Audit  of issues to revenue and cap ital, following should be seen:  
I) The vouchers  pertaining to the date selected should checked as regards 
correctness of the rates and allocation  and traced into the priced 
ledger /transaction register . 
II) Whether large quantity of stores , such as sleeper & coaches , were issued 
for a special  works  at or about the close of the year?  
III) Whether such issue  was don e for reducing balances or to utilize the grants 
for these works ?  
IV) Whether the indent  was authorized by the competent  authority ? 
V) Whether sufficient fund against the allotment for the accounti ng period?  
7.7.2 Delivery  Notes  - Issues  to Sales  
During Audit  of issues to sales , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the issue  vouchers  can be  traced in the priced ledger  or 
transaction register , the Debit/Credit  summaries  and Sales  Statement?  
II) Whether the purchase  money was paid in advance if the sal e was made to 
the outsiders?  
III) Whether percentages charges  prescribed  in the code were correctly 
levied?  
IV) Whether articles  sold to railway  employees  were only surplus  or 
condemned  articles ? 
V) Whether there is any tendency to issue  frequently ordinary articles , which 
can be purchased easily by the employees  from the market, to rai lway  
employees ? 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
531 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Whether the stores  sold as scrap  was declared as such by the survey  
committee ? 
VII) In case of sale of borings and turnings of valuable metals, such as brass, 
copper etc . whether the question of effecting economy  by casting them 
into ingots to be issued again in the foundries was considered?  
VIII) Whether the gate  passes  were connected with the sale order?  
IX) Whether all the dues were cleared by the purchaser?  
X) Whether delivery was made within the free  delivery period? If not, 
appropriate  ground  rent was realized from the purchaser?  
XI) Whether quantity and locati on of the material  was proper as mentioned in 
the auction catalogue / bid sheet?  
7.7.3 Delivery  Notes  - Issues  to Workshops  
During Audit  of issues to workshops , following should be seen:  
I) The vouchers  pertaining to the date selected should checked as regards 
correctness of the rates and allocation  and traced into the priced 
ledger /transaction register . 
II) Whether consolidated forecast  was made out for the rolling stock  
expected to be overhauled in the month ? 
III) Whether any list of materials  likely to be required during the next few 
days were given by the workshop authority ?  
IV) Whether the issue  of materials  matches with the AAC ? 
V) Whether issue  tickets  were signed by the competent  authority ?  
VI) Whether the shop  serial number (i.e. Requisition  Numbers) of the issue  
notes  for each shop  are continuous and that breaks in such conti nuity, if 
any, are satisfactorily explained?  
VII) Whether Issue  Notes  were received strictly according to schedule , i.e. by 
the evening of the day following the date of issue ? 
VIII) Whether the Issue  Notes  have been correctly prepared according to the 
instructions  issued for this purpose?  
IX) Whether the reconciliation  of Issue  Notes  with the Daily  Summaries  of 
Issues  was done by Accounts  office? If any and any discrepancy was 
found whether the matter was taken up with the Stores  Department ? 
7.7.4 Delivery  Notes - Inter Depot  Transfers  
During Audit  of issues in respect of Inter Depot  Transfers, following should 
be seen:  
I) The vouchers  pertaining to the date selected should be checked as rega rds 
correctness of the rates and allocation  and traced into the priced 
ledger /transaction register . 
II) Whether requisitions for stores  were approved  by the competent  
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
532 
For internal use of IA&AD  authority ? 
III) Whether the issue  was made with the approval  of the competent  
authority ? 
IV) Whether the necessity of the material  was properly spelled out ? 
V) Whether the issues and receipts  are paired and sufficient action  was taken 
to watch the acknowledgement  of outstanding  items?  
VI) Whether the receipts  were correctly  priced at the same rate  at which the 
corresponding issue  vouchers  were evaluated?  
VII) In the case of non -pairing of receipts  and issues, whether the same was 
reflected in “Stores -in-transit (Depot  Transfer )”? 
7.7.5 Other Delivery  Notes  – Inter Depot  Transfers  
During Audit  of issues in respect of Inter Depot  Transfers, following should 
be seen: 
I) In the case of stores  issued on loan to other Railways , whether instructions  
regarding pricing and return of such stores  were observed?  
II) In the case of fabrication  issue  note, whether materials  were valued at the 
rates at which they were originally issued plus the fabrication  charges ?  
III) Whether necessary postings were made in the Misc . Ad vance  Capital  
Statement (for fabricated stores ) or Deposit  Misc. Statement ( Stores  
issued on loan)?  
7.8 Ledgers / Transaction Register  
Priced ledger  is an annual  item of audit  done monthly  by dividing the total 
number of priced ledgers  as on Ist April of a year into twelve units  and one unit  is 
selected for audit every month . 
The review of priced ledgers  should be supplemented by a check of the computer  
printed  ‘opening balances’ statement, the extent of check being as prescrib ed in 
the programme  of audit . The priced ledgers  may be reviewed with reference to 
the periodical  listings by the computer, which contain all the items moved or 
unmoved. The review of priced ledgers  should be supplemented by a review of 
the following managerial statements prepared on the computer.  
I) Review of non -moved accounts  showing the items not mo ved over two -
years/one year etc.   
II) Review of priced ledgers  account  having irregular balances in quantity or 
value.  
III) Scrap statement.  
IV) Report  on value/volume analysis  to pin point account  having ex cessive 
balances with reference to the issue  of stores  as relates to the total volume 
of issues to the depot .  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
533 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Statement showing no issues for a certain period as fixed  by the stores  
depot.  
VI) Statement showing stock  holdings over one year's requirement as and 
when required and for specific item only.  
It should be further seen that  
I) Whether there were appreciable difference between the ledger  rate and 
the price list rate ? 
II) Whether book losses, depreciation  etc. of substantial amount have been 
regularly written off?  
III) Whether Average  Annual  Consumption  (AAC ) and the normal balances 
are suitably related to each other?  
IV) Whether grouping of articles  of different sorts and sizes is properly done?  
V)  Whether articles  differing in value were grouped together under one 
head ?  
VI) Whether reconciliation  is effected every month  or at such intervals  as the 
rules  on the subject may prescribe, of the balance  at debit  of stores  
according to the priced ledgers  with balance  in the General  Books  of the 
railway  and of the numerical  balances with those of the d epot ledger ? 
VII) Whether procedure of reconciliation  of priced ledger  with General  Books  
provides for a monthly  reconciliation of (a) Debits /Credits and balances 
in the class ledger  (depot -wise or consolidated as the case may be) with 
those appearing in the General Books; and (b) the balances in the priced 
ledger  with those in the General Boo ks. 
VIII) For discrepancies whether action  taken by the Accounts  office as 
adequate?  
IX) Whether there was any abnormal increase in the number of ledger  
headings which may appear  due to an unnecessary multiplication of  types 
or by reporting any instances where neglect ing the principle  of 
standardisation may result  in definite loss  to the railway ? 
X) Whether the maximum  stock  that may be held at any time  exceeded 50 
per cent of the issue  of each item during the year?  
XI) Whether procedure for systematic store -keeping control  like pres cribing 
maximum  and minimum was  in place?  
XII) Whether the quantity ord ered on each occasion is based on accurate data 
and was correctly calculated?  
XIII) Whether there is proper co -ordination  between the Stores  and consuming 
departments ? 
XIV)  Whether there are any cases of non -accountal of receipts  and excessive 
issues without physical  movement of stores  in the closing months of the 
year?  
XV) Whether total debit , credit  and balances in the class ledgers  are reconciled 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
534 
For internal use of IA&AD  with stores  Account  Current /General  Books ? 
7.9 Statements  
7.9.1 Monthly  Statement of Account  Current  
Monthly  statements are received in the Chief  Accounts  Office  from all the 
decentralised stores  Accounts offices.  
During Audit  of Monthly  Statement of Account  Current , following should 
be seen:  
I) Whether the opening balance  agrees with the closing balance  of the 
previous month ?  
II) The debits  and credits  should be e xamined and traced from the Debit and 
Credit  summaries  
III) Whether the closing balance  can be proved by ascertaining the items of 
which it is composed, with reference to the depot -wise debits  and credits  
summaries ? 
IV) Whether reconciliation  of the figures appeared in the consolidated 
statement reconciled with corresponding balances in the General  Books  
and with balances in the class ledgers ? 
V) The total receipts  and issues during a month  should be similarly 
reconciled.  
VI) Whether the stores  balances are properly agreed with General  Book 
balances and the agreement is duly attested? The procedure of 
reconciliation  with General Books  may be adopted with such 
modifications  as may be necessary by local  conditions.  
VII) Whether “To end of the month  figure” was arrived after adding the same 
of the previous month  with transaction for the month ? 
VIII) Whether all the statements received from different accounts  offices were 
correctly consolidated and proper Transfer  vouchers  made out?  
7.9.2 Account  Current  and Out turn Statement of the Printing Press  
During Audit  of Account  Current  and Out turn Statement of the Printing 
Press  including all processes which go to make the value of the outturn , 
following should be seen:  
I) Whether entries in the Account  Current  agree with the figures  appeared 
in the statement of Debit and Credit  summaries  printed  on the computer ? 
II) Whether there is robust system  of billing for forms supplied? The reasons 
for long outstandin g bills may be found.   
III) Where work  has been done for other Government  departments  or for 
foreign  railways, the charges  for supervision and maintenance  and 
depreciation  of machinery and the fixed  percentage  for indirect  charges  
were billed?  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
535 
For internal use of IA&AD  The Outturn Statements may be checked during loc al inspections  of the Printing 
Press if it is not possible to check them along with the Account Current.  
7.9.3 Sales  Abstracts  
During Audit  of Sales  Abstracts , following should be seen:  
I) Whether each sale has been sanctioned  by the proper authority  and 
included in the sales  Register ? 
II) Whether proper percentage  charges  prescribed  in the codes  have been 
correctly levied and bills  made out against the parties concerned?  
III) Whether there are any credit  items?  
IV) Whether the entries in the Sal es Register  are correct with reference to the 
computer  printed  sales  statement?  
V) Whether the postings are correctly made in the ledgers ? 
VI) Whether the totals agree w ith the head  "Sales ' in the General  Books  of the 
Railway ? 
(N.B. All printing presses  are being closed by March, 2022. Para 7.8.2 relating to 
printing press may be deleted from March, 2022.)  
7.10 Suspense  Registers  
7.10.1  Suspense  Register  - Purchase  
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  - Purchase , following should be seen:  
I) Whether separate registers  are maintained for purchases ‘Imported ’ and 
‘Indigenous ’? 
II) Whether all the credit  items are current , and relate to bills  payable for 
supplies received for which payment is outstanding ? 
III) Whether there are any debit  items, except cases where advance payment 
was made for the value of stores , not rec eived? Whether approval  of the 
competent  authority  was taken in this regard?  
IV) Whether proper and prompt action  was taken to clear the outstanding ? 
V) Accrual of long outsta nding  should be brought to the notice of FA.  
VI) Whether the outstanding  balances are chronic in nature and depict 
increasing trend?  
7.10.2  Suspense  Register  – Sales  
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  - Sales , following should be seen:  
I) Whether Sales  Suspense  was opened immediately after receipt  of Bid ? 
II) Whether mo nthly  debits  have been arrived from issue  of materials  for 
auction/ to Foreign  Railway / to private  sales ? 
III) Whether all debit  items are current  and that sufficient documentary 
evidence is available to claim recovery?  
IV) Whether the sales  have been made under competent  authority , and that 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
536 
For internal use of IA&AD  the proper departmental  charges  have been added to the book prices, when 
necessary?  
V) Whether there are any credit  items except in the case of cash  sales , auction 
sales  or sale by tender  where the value of material  sold is received in 
advance of actual issue  of stores ? 
VI) Whether the entries in the sales  register  are correct with reference to the 
comput er printed  statement of sales  balance ? 
VII) Whether the outstanding  balances are chronic in nature and depict 
increasing trend?  
VIII) Whether proper and prompt action  was taken to clear the outstanding ? 
7.10.3  Suspense  Register  - Deposit  Misc . Advances  
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  –Deposit  Misc . Advances , following 
should be seen:  
I) Whether the outstanding  balances are chronic in nature and depict 
increasing trend?  
II) Whether all-out effort was taken to clear the outsta nding ? 
III) Whether unusual  feature exists in old cases of outstanding  of heavier 
amounts?  
IV) Whether systematic reconciliation  is made with General  Books ? 
V) Whether deposits are adequate for fulfilling the requirement of the 
contract ? 
VI) Whether proper recoveries  have been made from the security  deposit  in 
the case of failure  on the part of the contactors to observe the terms of the 
contact?  
VII) Whether there are no debit  items under deposit  miscellaneous  and that all 
items are current  and relate to work  in progress?  
7.10.4  Suspense  Register  - Imported  Stores  
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  –Imported  Stores , followin g should be 
seen:  
I) Whether debits  have been accepted after receipt  and acceptance of TC ? 
II) Whether credit  figures are sourced from Receipt  Notes  received from 
different dep ots? 
III) Whether details of Receipt  Notes  have been recorded in the relevant 
registers  before posting in Import  Ledger ? 
IV) Whether closing balance  of prev ious month  agrees with the opening 
balance  of the next month ? 
V) Whether debit  and credit  figures are reconciled with journal  at the end of 
the month ? 
VI) Whet her outstanding  statement are being prepared periodically and sent 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
537 
For internal use of IA&AD  to executive  authority  for clearance?  
VII) Whether proper and prompt action  was taken to clear the outstanding ? 
7.10.5  Suspense  Register  - Imported  Invoices  
Detailed  in Para 7.5.2 and 7.6 .3 
7.10.6  Suspense  Register  - Inter Depot  Transfer  Register  
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  – Imported  Stores , following should be 
seen:  
I) Whether the receipts  are correctly priced a t the same rate  at which the 
corresponding issue  vouchers  are valued?  
II) Whether vouchers  of issue  and receipts  are passed and that sufficient action  is 
taken to watch the acknowledgement  of outstanding  items?  
III) If receipts  & issues are not paired during the month , whether it is reflected 
in the stores -in-transit (Depo t Transfer )? 
IV) Whether balances in the Register  have been reconciled monthly  with the 
General  Books  and that proper machinery exists in the Accounts  office to 
ensure that all the vouchers  have been taken into account ? 
7.10.7  Suspense  Register  - Fund  Register  
A Manuscript  register  should be mai ntained for the purposes of watching the 
incurrence of liabilities  against the budget  grant  distributed. It is now being 
maintained in iMM IS 
During Audit  of Suspense  Register  – Fund , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the amount of each contract  or each indent  forming a charge 
against the year's allotment has been entered in this register  under the 
appropriate  head  of stores ? 
II) Whether the cost  of stores  shown on accepted tenders , where such tenders  
themselves constitute the contracts  has been entered in this register  under 
the appropriate  head  of stores ? 
III) In respect of purchases arranged by the Controller  of Stores  under his 
powers of daily purchase  of petty  items, whether a statement has been 
called for monthly , and the figures intimated therein posted in the register  
under the appropriate  heads?  
IV) Whether excesses or savings due to alteration of contract  prices or the 
cancellation  of part or the whole of an existing contact or the issue  of a 
Modification  of a Purchase  Order have been posted in the register  as a 
reduction of or addition to the balance  of the grant ? 
V) Whether before placing any order or indent , a certificate  regarding 
availability of funds was obtained from the Accounts ? 
VI) Whether actual deliveries of the materials  during the financial  year remain 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
538 
For internal use of IA&AD  within the budgeted purchase  grant ? 
7.11 Stores  in Transit  Register  
When the stores  issued during a month  from a depot  are not received in the 
receiving depot in the same month , unaccounted items in the issue  summaries  
should be posted into a register  styled “Stores -in-transit” at the end of the month . 
This is generated as report in iMM IS. 
During Audit  of Stores  in Transit  Register , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the balance  outstanding  in the stores -in-transit account  is 
reconciled monthly  with the subsidiary  Registers?  
II) Whether steps have been taken for prompt clearance of the outstanding  
items?  
III) Whether the register  of outstanding  items is examined periodically by the 
stores  accounts  officer and delays in the acceptance and return of monthly  
account  current  are taken up with the departmental  officers and the Heads 
of Departments  and that repeated or protracted delays are specially 
brought to the notice of the General  Manager ? 
7.12 Stock  Adjustment  Account  
The Stock  Adjustment  Account  should be maintained for differences arising out 
as a result of stock  verification  or revaluation of stores , differences in book value  
and value realised in sales , losses on classification  of new  stores  as second hand  
scrap , breakage, leakage or loses i n transfer, rounding off etc. The report is being 
generated in iMM IS. 
During Audit  of Stock  Adjustment  Account , following should be seen:  
I) Whether the adjustments  are mainly on account  of excesses or 
deficiencies  discovered in actual stock  or due to discrepancies in values ?  
II) The items outstanding  in March  accounts  should be  scrutinised to see 
whether there are any large items the clearance of  which is held over on 
account  of insufficiency of funds or for any other inadequate reason.  
III) Whether the items are carried to Stock  Adjustment  Account  without 
proper investigation?  
IV) Whether there are items more than six months' old? If so, the reasons for 
their non -clearance may be investigated?  
V) Whether adeq uate reasons exist in all case s where clearance is deferred?  
VI) Wheth er prompt action  is taken to clear all the items as early as possible?  
VII) Whether the difference between the total amount placed under stock  
Adjustment  Account  during the year and the total for t he previous year is 
large? If so, the reason may be investigate d. 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
539 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.13 Stores  Adjustment  Sheets  
If there is any discrepancy in the ground  balance  and book balance  Stores  
Adjustment  Sheet  is being used for bringing priced ledger  balance  in accord with 
the actual ground  balance . 
During Audit  of Store Adjustment  Sheets, following should be seen:  
I) Whether the differences have been valued at the book average  rate 
prevailing on that date?  
II) Whether the postings were necessary and the justification  of the 
adjustment were genuine?  
III) Whether important shortages brought to notice during stock  verification  
were fully investigated before the difference in value due to 
reclassification of stores  were adjusted? Wh ether survey  committee  has 
recommended such reclassification or scraping and the recommendation 
has been accepted by the competent  authority ? Papers dealing with the 
procurement  of such materials  and circumstances leading to the materials  
being rendered obsolete or unserviceable  should be specially investigated, 
wherever the amount adjusted is heavy.  
7.14 Stock  Verification  Sheets  
As per codal  provision, the Stock  Verifier should prepare the stock  verification  
report in triplicate embodying the result of the verification  of each group of stores  
and obtain the signature  of the stores  holder on all the copies. The original copies 
of the stock  verification  reports  should be forwarded to the Stores  Accounts  
Officer and the duplicate and triplicate copies made over to the subordinate  
concerned and a receipt  obtained. The store  holder will after recording his 
explanations for discrepancies on both the copies of work  verification  report, 
forward them to his Divisional  Officer. The Divisional Officer will countersign 
and retain the triplicate copy for his office record and transmit the duplicate to 
the Stores Accounts Officer. The stock  verification  report on receipt from the 
Divisional Officer should be entered in a regis ter and dealt with by the Senior  
Inspectors . 
After introduction of iMM IS preparation of stock  verification  schedule  and 
reports  are being prepared in the system . 
During Audit  of Stock  Verification  Sheets , following should be seen:  
I) Whether verification  was done as pe r prescribed  periodicity ? If not, 
whether sufficient justification  exists for relaxing the periodicity and that 
such relaxation was made by the competent  authority ? 
II) Whether there is a regular verification  by actual count or measurement  or 
weighment  of all stores  from time  to time ? 
III) Whether  the instructions  contained in Paras 3306 , 3237 -38-S for 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
540 
For internal use of IA&AD  verification  by weighment , measurement , cost  etc. of bulky and heavy 
materials  like steel plates, c hannels, beams, coal etc. are properly 
followed and that such verifications are not confined merely to occasions 
when the stock  of any particular item is low?  
IV) Whether there is any wide variation between book and ground  balances  
of ferrous scrap  which is accounted for on the basis of estimated weight  
on account  of practical difficulties in sorting and weighing them on 
receipt  in the depots ? 
V) Whether the  accuracy  of the weighbridges  and other weighing machines  
is periodically tested by the executive  and whether a record is maintained 
of such tests?  
VI) Whether proper action  was taken on differences discovered in stock -
taking and full investigation was made in all important cases?  
VII) Whether any improper use of the stock  adjustment account  was made?  
VIII) In the case of shortage, whether re sponsibility was fixed  and adequate 
disciplinary action  was taken?  
IX) Whether loss  was regularised under the orders of competent  authority ? 
X) Whether there was unreasonable delay in t he disposal  of stock  sheets  
either by the departmental  offices or by the Accounts  office?  
XI) Whether the excesses and deficiencies  after review by the com petent  
authority  was posted in stores  priced ledgers ? 
7.15 Auction  Sale Account  
At the end of each auction the auctioneers will prepare an Auc tion Sale Account  
and send it in duplicate through the PCMM  who will countersign one copy and 
send it to the Accounts  Office . The auction sale accounts  should be received in 
the Accounts Office within a month  from the end of the auction according to the 
auction programme . 
However, after introduction of IREPS  and iMM IS preparation of E Auction  
reports  are being prepared in the system .  
During Audit  of Auction  Sale Account , following should be seen:  
I) Whether there were  proper arrangements for the auction sale of materials ? 
II) Whether the prices realised at one sale was compared with the prices 
realised for similar articles  at other sales ? 
III) Whether before selling the stores  to public , there is system  of sending lists 
of surplus  stores  to other Railways , which may be useful to them?  
IV) Whether the lists of stores  for auction have been made out under proper 
sanction?  
V) Whether the credits  for the values received have been afforded to the 
correct head  of Account ? 
VI) Whether the total amount realised in auction sale agrees with the total 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
541 
For internal use of IA&AD  remittance  as made?  
VII) Whether materials  put up for sale in auction are serviceable?  
VIII) Whether costly articles  are mixed up with lots of scrap  or condemned  
materials ? 
IX) In the case of sa les account  of scrap  metals whether there were  sufficient 
reasons for realising a higher value than the book value ? 
X) In cases of failure  to remove the materials  within the stipulated period by 
the buyers whether the penalty  as per  terms of Sale  was levied?  
XI) Whether remission  or reduction of ground  rent on materials  sold by  action  
but not removed within free  time was allowed? If so, whether there was 
sanction of the competent  authority ? 
XII) Whether suitable arrangements exists to ensure that only such m aterials  
are issued from stock /workshops  etc. as have actually been sold and that 
the description and quality  as well as quantity of the materials  are correct?  
XIII) Whether all materials  sold in lots are weighed  before auction in the 
presence of an Inspector  of Stores  Accounts ?  
XIV)  Whether the lists of weighment  of lots received in Accounts  Office  agrees 
with that mentioned in the Auctioneer's  sale Account ? 
XV) In case of delay in payment, interest  is recovered or not from the 
firm/contractor & Tax  collection at Source (TCS ) on sale of scrap  is made 
or not.  
7.16 Yearly  Statement of Stores  Transactions  
The annual  statement of stores  transactions is the statement s howing the money 
value of actual balances of stores  in hand  expressed in thousands of rupees at the 
end of each financial  year prepared in form no. S -3001 . A copy of this statement 
is sent to the Railway  Board  so as to reach them by the 1st November of the year 
following the financial  year. The statement is prepared by the PCMM  with the 
assistance of the Accounts  Officer.  The statement is accompanied by three 
annexure.  
Annexure' A ' -is in the form of questionnaire which should be answered duly 
certifi ed by the FA & CAO .  
Annexure 'B' - is a review of balances under materials  at site account  for the year.  
Annexure 'C' - is a statement of balance  of charged off imprest  compris ing the 
balance  at the end of the year with each category of imprest holder.  
During Audit  of Yearly  Statement of Stores  Transactions, following should 
be seen:  
I) Whether money value of the stores  in hand  is classified  under each 
important head , viz. values are shown separately for ordinary stores , 
stores  for special  works  and for s urplus  stores . 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
542 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Whether the balances in hand  of ordinary stores  are much in excess of 
those prescribed  by the Railway  Board ? 
III) Whether items un der “special  stores ” have been outstanding  for any 
considerable time  which would tend to show that the stores  were obtained 
long before the necessity for their use was likely to  arise?  
IV) Whether as far as possible stores  obtained for special  works  were issued 
to the works  concerned and charged off?  
V) Whether prompt action  is taken to dispose of surplus  stores  at a reasonable 
price? While scrutinising the accounts  of surplus  stores , the reasons for 
such stores  becoming surplus  should be ascertained to see  whether any of 
these were originally obtained unnecessarily?  
VI) Whether discrepancy, if any, was brought to the notice of the FA & 
C.A.O?  
VII) Whether the balances shown in the statement are correct, effective and 
efficient?  
VIII) Whether the Railway  Administration  has unnecessarily reduced the stores  
balances by resorting to the following means?  
a)  writing down of values without sufficient causes;  
b)  charging of stores  to works  on wh ich they are not requ ired for use 
immediately;  
c)  under valuing returned stores ;  
d)  undue  acceleration of the sale of surplus  stores ;  
e)  keeping off the payment or accountal of receipt  of stores  towards the 
end of the year till the next financial  year 
7.17 Yearly  Statement of Purchases  
This statement, which shows the details of stores  purchased during t he year from 
various sources.  
During Audit  of Yearly  Statement of Stores  Transactions, following should 
be seen:  
I) It should be scrutinised generally to see how for the Government  stores  
purchase  policy , has been adhered to.  
II) The statement may be compared with the previous year’s  statement and 
the reasons for important variations investigated.  
7.18 Locomotive  Energy  Account  
This comprises of the accounts  of coal, diesel and electric  power  for steam, diesel 
and electric  locomotives  respectively.  
The responsibility fo r the initial accounting of receipts  and issues of coal/diesel 
rests with the Mechanical  Department  in the case of coal/diesel required in 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
543 
For internal use of IA&AD  workshops  and with the Operating  Department in the case of coal/diesel required 
for the running  of engines . 
During Audit  of Yearly  Statement of Locomotive  Energy  Account , following 
should be seen:  
I) Whether the quantities received agree with the railway  receipts  and the 
bills and that there is an effective check of the weight  when taking over 
from the Traffic  Department .  
II) Whether Issues  from the central  depot  and receipts  in the various running  
sheds  was tallied and any discrepancies were  taken up with the Traffic  
Department .  
III) The monthly account current submitted to the Accounts  Office should be 
checked in detail with the vouchers of the receipts and issues and also 
with corresponding posti ngs in the ledgers.  
7.19  Linking of Loco Coal despatches with receipts  
Under the computerised system each railway  links all loco  coal wagons 
despatched to  home  loco sheds of a  Railway with  loco coal wagons  actually 
received,  invariably throwing up some ‘m issing despatches’ and ‘unconnected 
receipts’.  The missing despatches and unconnected receipts as noticed on each 
Railway are then linked in a  centralized ‘run’ on an all -Railway basis to take care 
of all inter -railway diversions of loco coal  wagons.  In respect of missing wagons, 
which still remain untraced, claims are lodged with the  Commercial  Department 
and necessary particulars are furnished to enable that Department to trace  such 
wagons.  
The following  suspense  regist ers maintained  by the Accounts  Office  for the 
unconnected/missing wagons should be checked in the same way as for other 
suspense registers  mentioned  in para 7.10.  
I) Purchase  Register  (Fuel);  
II) Stores -in-Transit  Register  (Fuel);  
III) Stock  Adjustmen t Account  (Fuel).  
In addition, it should be seen that debits and credits to these heads agree with the 
entries in the reports   prepared by the computer.  Claims for missing wagons have 
been lodged with the carrier  railways in time and no  loss has been susta ined by 
the Railway Administration due to slackness of  the staff concerned and the final 
list of missing and unconnected wagons has been duly accepted by  the 
Commercial  Department, if they fail to prove delivery of coal.   Where it is fi nally 
decided to  write off the amount of missing wagons or to set off the amount of 
missing wagons against the  amount of  unconnected wagons,  such proposals  
should be zealously  scrutinised  in Audit . 
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
544 
For internal use of IA&AD  The electric power is generally obtained fro m State Electricity Board /Private 
Companies in  addition  to generation  in the Railways  own power  houses.  
The bills for power  supply  by the  State  Electricity  Board  etc. should  be checked  
with reference to the accompanying meter re ading statement duly accepted by the 
Railway and rates as  provided in the agreement for power supply.  The power so 
purchased should be correlated with the  distribution  statement allocating the 
energy to various traction and other servi ces to see whether there  is any wide  
variation  and if so the reasons  therefor.  
7.20  Inspection  work  of Receipt  & Despatch  Wards  of Stores  Depots  
The arrangements and procedure for verifying the quantity and quality  of stores  
received for stock , and of materials  delivered at the site of works  should be 
examined by occasional  inspection  on the spot to see that the system  is complete 
and reliable and that the accounts  of suppliers  are not settled finally pending  such 
verification . 
During local  inspection  of Receipt  & Despatch  Wards  of Stores  Depots , 
following should be seen  
I) Whether the stores  received were weighed / counted/ measured  and quality  
was checked with reference to the samples or specifications  of P.O.  and 
inspected before issue  of Receipt  Note in iMM IS. 
II) Whether all materials  received in the depot  stocked properly without 
mixing up with existing stock  of stores  in the depot.  
III) Whether the procedure of  issue  of stores  includes issue  of gate  passes  and 
the materials  sent out are correct according to the issue  vouchers . 
IV) Whether the system  of checking the quality  and quantity of the stores  
before issue  from stock  and preparation of Delivery  Note which 
subsequently form the basis of adjustment against the works  and 
departments  concerned and the procedure of verification  on the part of the 
receiving and accepting departmental  authorities  on the other side was in 
practic e. 
V) Whether there was any delay in receipt  and issue  of stores  
7.21  Accountal , Custody and disposal  of scrap  
During local  inspection  of Scrap  Depots , following should be seen  
I) Whether the scrap  received were weighed / counted/ measured  with 
reference to DS -8? 
II) Whether each lot consists of same type of materials  to ensure proper 
valuation ? 
III) Whether there was any delay in formation of lot, preparation of catalogue 
and subsequent auction?  
IV) Whether proper precautions for the scrap  materials  against deterioration 
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
545 
For internal use of IA&AD  and loss  were taken?  
V) Whether the scrap  sold was removed within stipulated free  time? If not, 
whether proper ground  rent was recovered?  
List of items to b e seen d uring inspection  
Headquarters  office  
I) Pay order book  
II) Special  casual  leave  and leave  account  
III) Liquidate d damage s 
IV) General  damage  
V) Risk cost purchase  
VI) Pass/PTO /Duty  Pass Account  
VII) Cash  imprest  
VIII) Stationary  Account  
IX) Arbitration  and court  cases  
X) Inventory  Management  
XI) Turn Over  Ratio  (TOR ) 
XII) Estimate  sheets  i.e. Balance  Returns (BRs ) 
XIII) Review of tender  cases  
XIV)  Tools  & plant register  
XV) Policy  files 
XVI)  Overstock  & inactive  items  
XVII)  Price List  (Issuance  of New  PLs and deletion of old PLs)  
XVIII)  Review of previous inspection  reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
XIX)  General  review of Purchase  Orders   
XX) Release of Security  Deposit   
XXI)  Periodical  Confidential  Demi Offici al (PCDO ) letter file /Policy  files 
XXII)  Review of Surplus /Non -moving item list available with inventory  cell 
XXIII)  Development  of ven dors 
XXIV)  Target  for sale of scrap  and its achievement etc . 
XXV)  Any other issues if noticed  
Depot  
I) Attendance  register , Casual  leave , Special  Casual Leave  Register  and 
Leave account  
II) Salary  bills and Pay  fixation  
III) Pass/PTO /Duty  Pass Account  
IV) Local  tender  and contract  & purchase  order  
V) Disposal  of over stock  and inactive  stores  
VI) Review of rejected  store  
VII) Wharfage  and demurrage  charges  
VIII) Credit  Notes  
 Railway Audit Manual   
 
546 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) Theft  and lost  cases  
X) Imprest  cash 
XI) General  damage  
XII) Liquidated  damage  
XIII) Daily  Receipt  Register  (DRR ) 
XIV)  Receipts  notes  (e-R. Notes ) 
XV) Ground rent  charges  
XVI)  Incidental  charges  
XVII)  Risk & cost  purchase  
XVIII)  Issue  notes  
XIX)  Review of stock  sheets  
XX) Depot  transfer inward and outwards (DTs)  
XXI)  Tools  & plant register  
XXII)  Disposal  of scrap  
XXIII)  Policy  files 
XXIV)  Surplus /Non -moving/Overstock /Inactive  items  
XXV)  Stock  sheets  
XXVI)  Gate  passes  
XXVII)  Activities  of Receipt  Section . 
XXVIII)  Activities  of Ledger  Section  
XXIX)  Activities  of Issue  Section  
XXX)  Estimate  Sheets  
XXXI)  System  of stock  verification  
XXXII)  Disposal  of Surplus /non-moving  stores  
XXXIII)  Disposal  of returned stores  
XXXIV)  Weig hment  & measurement  details of stores  
XXXV)  Sale of store  and scrap   
XXXVI)  DS8 Note Register  
XXXVII)  Penalties  waved and imposed  
XXXVIII)  Auction  sale account  etc. 
XXXIX)  Delivery  of scrap  including specialized weighments.  
XL) Any other issues if noticed  
  
Chapter 14 – Audit of Stores Department  
 
547 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
548 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER 15 - AUDIT OF SAFETY DEPARTMENT  
There was no separate chapter on Audit  of Safety  Organisation  in Railway  Audit 
Manual  (5th Edition). This chapter is prepared taking into account  the latest rules , 
regulations  and manuals  issued by the Railway Board , Indian  Railways  Website  
and Indian Railway Knowledge  Portal.  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
Safety  Organization on Indian  Railway  was created on the recommendations  of 
Railway Accident  Committee , 1962 headed by Shri Kunzru. It was further 
strengthened and expanded on the recommendations  of Wanctoo  Committee, 
1968. This organization  is a disciplinary organization envisaged to ensure that 
safe practices are followed by framing and implementing necessary rules  and 
regulation and creating safety  consciousness amongst staff  dealing with train 
operation . The organization is also assigned to conduct Safety Audit  and also to 
hold accident  enquires  to investigate the causes of accidents  and analyse them 
and to take preventive  measures . ED/Safety (Mechanical ) 
2. ORGANISATIONAL HIRARCHY  
2.1 Railway  Boar d Level  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minister of Railways  
Chairman Railway Board  
 
PED/Safety  
ED/Safety  ED/Safety -II ED/Safety 
(Mecha -
nical)  
 
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
549 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.2 Zonal  Headquarters  Level  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Divisional  Level  
 
 
 
 
3. BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF SAFETY ORGANISATION : - 
3.1 Railway  Board  
At the Apex  level there is Safety  Directorate  in the Railway  Board  headed by 
Principal  Executive  Director  (PED ) assisted by Executive Directors / Directors 
and supporting staff . Chairman  Railway Board  is in charge of Safety D irectorate.  
3.2 Zonal  Railways  
At the Zonal  Railway  Headquarters , Principal  Chief  Safety  Officer (PCSO ) is the 
head, assisted by Dy.  CSO  of each department namely Operating , Mechanical , 
Engineering , S&T  and Electrical . A small contingent  of supporting staff  and a 
Safety team consisting of Senior  Scale  officers or Assistant  Scale Officers and 
Safety Counsellors of Mechanical, S&T, Engineering, Electrical and Operating  
Departments  are also working under PCSO in safety  related matters.  
3.3 Divisional  Level  
At the divisional  level, the safety  organization  is managed  by JA/Senior  Scale  
officers (Sr. DSO /DSO). There are one or two Junior  Scale officers to assist Sr. PRINCIPAL CHIEF SAFETY OFFICER  
Dy. CSO/Engg.  Dy. CSO/Elect.  Dy. CSO/Mech.  Dy. CSO/S&T  
Safety  
Councellor/Eng
g Safety 
Councello r/Elec
t Safety Councellor/Mech  Safety 
Councellor/S&T  
Sr. Divl. Safety Officers  
Safety Officers  GENERAL MANAGER  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
550 
For internal use of IA&AD  DSO/DSO but this practice  is not uniform . The Sr. Divisional  Safety  Officer is 
also assisted by a team of Safety Counsellors drawn from different departments .  
3.4 Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  (CRS ): 
An independent  organization  headed by Chief  Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  
(CCRS ) Headquartered  at Lucknow is functio ning under the Ministry  of Civil  
Aviation. CCRS is assisted by nine CRSs on the railways and they are deemed to 
be the custodians of safety  on Indian  Railways . 
4. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE DEPARTMENT  
The main function of Safety  Organization is to check the functioning of all 
departments  in respect of safety  aspects of passengers  and Roll ing stock  and other 
railway  assets . Attending site of accident  to restore normalcy, conducting 
accident  enquiries and take follow up  action, organize preventive  measures , 
conduct safety inspections  (Safety Audit ), Safety seminars  and to educate the 
staff to meticulously obse rve the safety rules  are the other functions  of this 
organization . The Sr. DSO /DSO also keeps a watch on the safety inspections  by 
other Branch  officers and  supervisors .  
4.1 At Railway  Board  Level (Wing Wise Activities )54 
4.1.1  Safety  (Accidents)  
I) Train  accidents  (consequential and indica tive) excluding cases of train 
Wrecking , trespassing and run  over, persons falling out of running  trains , 
casualties in roof -top travelling , cases of landslides , breaches , OHE   
breakdowns, public  agitations, etc.  
II) Monitoring  of consequential train accidents .  
III) Receipt  and circulation of consequentia l and indicative train accident  
messages.  
IV) Compilation  & updating of Accident  related data and statistics.  
V) Analysis  of consequential train accident  statistics and trend s.  
VI) Maintenance  of Monthly  Statement showing detailed statistics of train 
accidents  on Indian  Railways .  
VII) Preparation  of briefs for visits of Mi nisters, Board , Parliamentary  
Standing  Committee  and other similar Committees.  
VIII) Preparation  of briefs for various meetings, such as Board ’s Safety  
Meetings, Minister ’ meetings with Board, Participation of Railway  
Employees  in Management  (PREM ) meetings, Consultative  Committee  
of Members  of Parliament , General  Managers ’ Conference, COMs’ 
conference  CSOs’ Conference, etc.  
IX) Submission of Monthly  Review of train accidents  to Board .  
                                                           
54 Authority : HQ ’s Letter No. 354/RA II/17 -1/Audit  Plan /2018 dated 13 September, 2018   
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
551 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) Para on Safety  for Monthly  Summary for the Cabinet .    
XI) Compilation  and Printing of the Annual  Safety  Performance  Booklet  of 
Indian  Railways .  
XII) Parliamentary  business related to above items, including Calling 
Attention Notices, Cut Motions , Suo -Moto  Statements and Motions on 
Demands  of Grants , etc. relating to Train  Accidents and Safety . 
XIII) Rajbhasha  related work  of Safety  Directorate .  
XIV)  RTI cases related to above items.   
XV) Any other work  assigned by senior officers  
4.1.2  Safety  (Rules ) 
I) All matters relating to General  Rules  and Subsidiary  Rules.  
II) Matters pertaining to Station  Working Rules  (SWRs).  
III) Accident  Manual  related work .  
IV) Implementation of Recommendations of Commissioners  of Railway  
Safety  relating to Rules .  
V) Handling  of References of Zonal  Railways  relating to Operating  Rules .  
VI) Issues  related to replacement  of Guard’s Boxes.  
VII) Parliamentary  Business  related to above items.  
VIII) RTI cases related to above items.  
4.1.3  Safety  (Inquiries)  
I) Rules  of Accident  Inquires  – Commission  of Inquires, CRS  Inquires, 
Departmental  Inquires, etc.  
II) Watching progress of finalization of accident  inquires conducted by the 
Railways , including inquires entrusted  to the Railway  Administration  by 
Commissioner  of Railway Safety  and Departmental  inquires.  
III) Examination  of Reports  of Departmental  (Non -CRS ) Inquires  conducted 
by Zonal  Railways  in Board  reported cases and recommendations  made 
therein.  
IV) Monitoring  of finalization of Discipline and Appeal  Rules  (DAR ) cases 
against staff  involved in t rain accidents  (including CRS  cases).  
V) Norms  for award  of punishments  to the defaulting  person/s in train 
accidents .  
VI) Maintenance  of statistics regarding punishment to the defaulting  Staff  in 
train accidents  (including CRS  cases).  
VII) Review of adequacy of punishments  in train accidents  (including CRS  
cases).  
VIII) Criteria for award  of Safety  Shield  
IX) Data  compilation  of Accidents for award  of Safety  Shield.   
X) Suggestions/proposals r egarding safety  in train operation  or enhancement 
of safety by way of innovations from outsiders.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
552 
For internal use of IA&AD  XI) Reference of PMO , MPs , VIPs  and other dignitaries .  
XII) Handling  References of staff  Federations and Unions.  
XIII) Management  of Special  Railway  Safety  Fund  (SRSF ).  
XIV)  All Safety  related issues per taining to ACD, TPWS, VCD, Fog  Safe 
Device  and other such technologies .  
XV) Condemnation  of infringement  of Schedule  of Dimensions relating  to 
S&T .  
XVI)  Parliamentary  business related to the above items.   
XVII)  RTI cases related to the above items.   
4.1.4  Safety  (CRS ) 
I) Examination  of the Accident  Inquiry  Reports  of the Commissioners  of 
Railway  Safety  and Judicial Commissions on serious train accidents .  
II) Examination  of the r ecommendations  made by the Commissioners  of 
Railway  Safety  and Inquiry  Commissions in consultation with various 
Directorates  in Board ’s office.  
III) Monitoring  the implementation  of the accepted recommendations  of 
CRS /Inquiry  Commission  on the Railways .  
IV) Liaison with the Ministry  of Civil  Aviation and Commissioner  of Railway  
Safety  regarding train accidents  inquired into by the Commissioner of 
Railway Safety and other issues related to IR .  
V) Annual  Report  on the working of the Commission  of Railway  Safety .  
VI) Compilation  of material  connected with CRS  inquiries for inclusion in the 
Annual  Safety  Performance  Review.  
VII) Maintenance  and updating of data -base of Accidents inquired into by CRS  
including recommendations , follow -up, responsibilities, DAR , etc.  
VIII) Safety  related issues of Level Crossings  including Public  Awareness 
Campaigns. Closure, Merger , Demanding of Level Crossings, 
replacement  of LC gates with ROB /RUB /LHS.  
IX) Parliamentary  business related to above items.   
X) RTI cases related to above items.   
XI) Any othe r work  assigned by senior officers.   
4.1.5  Safety  (Disaster  Management ) 
I) All matters relating to Disaster  Management .  
II) Co-ordination  with other Ministries and Departments , NDMA , NIDM , 
NDRF  etc. on disaster management .  
III) Monitoring  and coordination  of implementation  of NDMA  guidelines .   
IV) Preparation  and updating of Disaster  Management  Plan, Crisis 
Management Plan, Emergency  Support Funct ion Plan etc. of Ministry  of 
Railways .   
V) Monitoring  the implementation  of recommendations  of the High  Level 
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
553 
For internal use of IA&AD  Committee  on Disa ster Management , Disaster Management Review 
Committee, etc.  
VI) Disaster  Management  training  – Coordination  with IRITM, Lucknow, etc.   
VII) Disaster  Management /Safety  related National  Seminars and Conferences .   
VIII) Analysis  of Signal  passing  at Danger (SPAD ) Cases and their foll ow up  
including DAR .  
IX) Issues  relating to running  staff.   
X) Analysis  of over 10 -hours-duty cases of loco  pilots .   
XI) Issues  related to asset /equipment  failures.   
XII) Preventive  action  on train accidents  involving fire , including pantry cars.   
XIII) Web site management  and other IT  related works  of Safety  Directorate . 
XIV)  Parliamentary  business related to above items.   
XV) RTI cases related to above items.   
4.1.6  Safety  (Implementation)  
I) Monitoring  of implementation  of High  Powered Railway  Accident  
Committees and Railway Safety  Review Committee . 
II) Implementation of accepted recommendations  of Commission  of Railway  
Safety  and Commissions of Inquiry  on items relating to Safety (Imp).  
III) Monthly  reports from Zonal  Railways  on Safety , including MCDO  and 
maintenance  of relevant data (excluding accident  statistics).  
IV) Inspection  Notes  of Board  Members , other Safety  Officers - follow up . 
V) Inspection  and spot checks  on actual practices being followed on 
Railways  in observance of Rules  and regulations  affecting safe  operation  
of trains . 
VI) Inter -Railway  Safety  Inspections and Safety Audit -follow up . 
VII) Railway  Board  Safety  Teams.  
VIII) Safety  Drives and Safety Action Plan . 
IX) Coordination  of activities of Safety  Organi sation  on Zonal  Railways , 
including Safety set up.  
X) Enhancing and strengthening communication  with field units  regarding 
safety  instructions , activities relating to enhancement of safety in train 
operation . 
XI) Special  Railway  Safety  Fund  (SRSF ). 
XII) Follow up action  on corporate documents  e.g. ‘ White Paper on Safety  on 
IR’, ‘Corporate  Safety Plan ’, ‘Vision 2020 ’ etc.  
XIII) Follow up action  on decisions taken in various 
meetings/conferences/committees and studies on items pertaining to 
Safety  (Imp).  
XIV)  Issues  related to provision of Hand Signal  Lamp and Tail Lamp etc.  
XV) Accident  Free Service  Award to select Safety  category staff , Zonal  Safety 
and other Awards , Po to reward persons who help in averting train 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
554 
For internal use of IA&AD  accidents . 
XVI)  Work  connected with award  of Safety  Shield.  
XVII)  Issues  regarding training  of Safety  Category  Staff  including PME , 
Refresher , Safety Camps etc.  
XVIII)  Issues  related to Psycho -testing  of Safety  related staff , coordination  with 
RDSO ’s Psycho -Technical  Cell on Safety related matters, Assessment  
Centres.  
XIX)  Parliamentary  business related to above items.  
XX) RTI cases related to above items.  
4.2 At Zonal  Level55 
4.2.1  Activities :- 
Safety  Organization  of Zone had the responsibility of monitoring  and ensuring 
the safety  in the train operation  of Zone. The Organisation  at the Divisional  level 
ensures that the safety at the Divisional level in train operation s is monitored and 
ensured. The task is achieved by undertaking following activities:  
I) Identifying various deficiencies  through inspections  by the Zonal  Officers 
as well as the Divisi onal Officers and Safety  Counsellors. The 
observations are also uploaded in Safety Information  Management  
System  (SIMS ) for the information of the Railway  Board . The 
deficiencies  are discussed at Weekly Safety Review Meeting  by GM , 
PHODs  and DRMs at Divisional level.  
II) Coordinating  Night  footplate a nd station inspection  by HQ  and Divisional  
Officers and supervisors . 
III) Launching of various Safety  Drives as per instruction of Railway  Board , 
Zones and Divisions  time to time  and feedback.  
IV) Analysis  of all accident  cases along with implementation  of D&AR  action  
as per Railway  Board  norms  and recommendations  of Enquiry  committee . 
V) Preparation  of Safety  Action Plan  and collection of data from various 
technical  departments  and review time  to time  at Divisional , Zonal  and 
Railway  Board  Level.  
VI) Collection  of Divisional  MCDO  figures, analysis  thereof and completion  
of Zonal  MCDO to Railway  Board  for further analysis  and action  from 
their end.  
VII) Doing the Safety  studies of various Divisions  of the Zone and also 
conducting Inter Zonal  Audits of the Zone as decided by the Railway  
board.  
                                                           
55 Authority : Eastern  Railway  Administration ’s Letter No. TA -5/143/Pt. V dated 06.03.2019 and website of Indian  
Railway s (www.indian railway .gov.in)  
 
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
555 
For internal use of IA&AD  VIII) To conduct the Accident  Inquiry  into the Non - CRS  cases and recommend 
measures  for prevention of such cases in future.  
IX) To monitor the progress of various inf rastructural works  related to Safety  
viz. interlocking  of L.C. gates, changing of mechanical interlocking  to  
electronic  interlocking  , TRR ,CRR , PSR ,TSR  etc. 
X) Overall supervision of all aspects of Safety  issues and deciding policies 
for safe  operations . 
XI) Release of Safety  Bulletin and Safety Calendar  of Division  timely for 
awareness and planning  of the Safety strategy.  
XII) Preparation  of Disaster  Management  Plan for the Zone.  
4.3 Responsibility and Function -Designation wise (Zonal  Rly HQ )56 
4.3.1  Responsibilities of the Principal  Chief  Safety  Officer:  
Principal  Chief  Safety  Officer (PCSO ) is the Head of the Safety Department  of 
Zonal  Railway , Coordinating with CRS  and liaison  with all other Department on 
Safety Aspects.  
4.3.2 Respo nsibilities of Dy.  CSOS in the Headquarters : 
I) Dy. Chief  Mechanical  Engineer /Safety   
a) He shall be the nodal officer in charge in cas e of Disaster  
Management . 
b) He shall be coordinating in charge for all co -ordination  regarding 
Disaster  Management  Plan preparation and monitoring , preparedness 
and implementation .  
c) He shall be the nodal officer in charge in various matters related to 
ART , ARME , including Mock  drills , full scale disaster drill  – etc. 
d) He shall be in -charge of safety  issues related to loco  running  staff and 
all related correspondence for activities like running  room, crew 
booking  lobbies, workshops  etc. 
e) He shall be the nodal officer for Audit  objection and draft paras etc.  
f) He shall be responsible for conducting safety  audit  in C&W depots , 
lobbies and work shops  etc.  
g) Reply to Parliamentary  questions .  
h) Preparation  of Safety  Action Plan .  
II) Dy. CE/Safety   
a) He shall be responsible f or creation of all posts  for Safety  
Organization . 
                                                           
56 Authority : website of Indian  Railway  (www.indianrailway.gov.in)  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
556 
For internal use of IA&AD  b) He shall be responsible for collecting data for Safety  Action Plan  
pertaining to Engineering  Department . 
c) He shall be responsible for co -ordination  with Divisions  to monitor 
the progress of safety  related work . 
d) He will be a nodal officer for all matters relating to PREM  & 
DRUCC /ZRUCC  meetings.  
e) He shall be responsible for conducting safety  audits in PWI depots . 
f) Compliance  of CRS ’s inspections .  
g) Any other duties  assigned by CSO .  
III) Dy. CSTE /Safety  
a) He shall be in -charge of all PC , Software  and IT  related issues.  
b) He shall accompany CSO  in case of major  inspections .  
c) All safety  stores , budget , financial  matters, hired vehicles etc.  
d) He will monitor the implementation  of night  footplate a nd station 
inspections .  
e) Control  of cash  imprest  for office and computer  consumables  etc. 
f) Issue  of safety  drive, compliances to Board .  
g) Issue  of Safety  Bulletin, Safety Posters . 
h) Issue  of Safety  Wall Calendars, Table Calendars indicating different 
safety  rules  etc. and issue  of diaries as prepared by other Railways .  
i) Any other duties assigned by CSO .  
IV) Dy. COM /Safety   
a) He shall be in -charge of Office  of CSO   
b) He shall co -ordinate  all issues and shall be responsible for maintaining 
liaison  with Railway  Board & CRS  etc., such as  
i) Reporting of Accident  to Board  (GM  & CRS )  
ii) Correspondence with Railway  Board .  
iii) Comments of CSO /ER in connection with modification  of GR .  
iv) Issue  of Accident  Statistics  to Board . 
c) Preparation  of booklet for GM  conference  and POM .  
d) Compliance  of Accident  enquiry to C RS & Railway  Board . 
e) Preparation  of papers for Safety  Meeting .  
f) He shall be responsible for controlling Emergency  Control  and shall 
be the nodal officer in case of accident .  
g) Any other duties assigned by CSO .  
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
557 
For internal use of IA&AD  4.4 Divisional  Level Activities  of Railway57 
I) Finalisation  of Inspection  programme  of Officers and Supervisors  
regarding safety  inspections . The deficiencies  detected are placed before 
Divisional  Safety  Review Meetin g for corrective action . 
II) The inspections  deficiencies  highlighted in SIMS  to be rectified and 
complied by Divisions  and the position is uploaded in the s ystem  for 
information of Zone and Railway  Board . 
III)  Launching various Safety  drives and compliance  thereof.  The report of 
compliance is sent to head  quarter . 
IV) Monitoring  the issues of Safety  Bulletin, Safety Calendars issued by Head 
quarter.  
V) Preparation  of MCDO  with details to head  quarter  by 5th of every month . 
VI) Preparation  of Disaster  Management  Plan for the Division . 
VII) Conducting Accident  Inequity at divisional  level as decided by the 
competent  Authority . 
VIII) Accident  reporting and analysis  with Enquiry  Findings, enforcing 
Discipline and Appeal  Rule  again st responsible staff  and remedial  action  
taken of the findings of Enquiry Report . 
IX) Conducting Inter – Divisional  Safety  audit  as decided by the Comp etent  
Authority . 
X) Implementation of all Safety  Circulars , policy  etc., through all Branch  
Officers of the Divisions . 
XI) Over  all supervision of all aspects of safety  of divisions , action  taken 
accordingly and reported to head  quarter . 
4.4.1 Additional  Activities  at Divisio nal Level  
I) Night  inspections .  
II) Safety  audit .  
III) Safety  drives.  
IV) To attend accident  and derailment site.  
V) Surprise Mobile  Breath an alyzers test of Drivers.  
VI) Counselling  of staff .  
VII) Monitoring  of functioning of loco  Inspectors  of Electrical & Mechanical  
Departments  towards crew counselling .  
VIII) Regular  Safety  Meeting  with Branch  Officers at DRM ’s level.  
IX) Monitoring  on training  at Divisional  Training School.  
X) Accident  enquiry.  
XI) Monitoring  over D&AR  proceedings on safety  related cases.  
                                                           
57 Authority : Easte rn Railway  Administration ’s Letter No. TA -5/143/Pt. V dated 06.03.2019 and website of Indian  
Railways  (www.indian railway.gov.in)  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
558 
For internal use of IA&AD  XII) Publication  of posters, booklets, handbills, safety  circulars  etc.  
XIII) Follow up of Board  & Headquarters  directives.  
XIV)  Monitoring  over PME  & Refresher  courses.  
XV) Compilation  of accident  statistics and preparation of safety  MCDO .  
XVI)  Monitoring  on implementation  of various recommendations  on safety .  
XVII)  Any other work  assigned by CSO , DRM  from time  to time . 
XVIII)  Conducting mock  drill with NDRF  (Conducting mock drills  on Disaster  
Management  in collaboration  with NDRF).  
4.5 Records  Maintained at Zonal  Head Quarters  Level:58 
I) File on safety  action  plan.  
II) Inspection  file. 
III) File on launching of various safety  drive.  
IV) File on preparation of MCDO  
V) File on Safety  Audits of various Divisions . 
VI) File on Safety  Bulletin and Safety Calendar . 
VII) File on Inspection  deficiencies . 
VIII) Case -wise accident  files. 
IX) Preparation  of safe ty bulletin and safety calendar . 
4.6 Records  Maintained at Divisional  Level:59 
I) Inspection  files of GM , PCSO , DRM  
II) Accident  cases.  
III) Safety  Review Meeting . 
IV) -Court  Cases.  
V) Tender /quotation file . 
VI) Accident  prevention file . 
VII) Safety  Audit  file. 
VIII) Foot Plate Inspection  Report . 
5 FOCUS AREAS IN AUDIT:  
5.1  Codes  and Manuals  
The Codes  and Manuals , Rule  Books  etc. foll owed by the Safety  Department  are 
enumerated below:  
I) Indian  Railway  Operating  Manual .  
II) Indian  Railway  Block  Working Manual .  
III) Indian  Railway  Accident  Manual . 
IV) Disas ter Management  Act 2005  
                                                           
58Authority : Note of COS /Safety  of Eastern  Railway  vide No. G/SAFETY/Staff /2016 dated 16th December, 2016 
and Letter of Deputy  CSO /Operating , Eastern Railway Vide No. T.A.5/143/Pt. V dated 05.04.2019  
59 Authority : Letter of Sr. Divl. Safety  Officer, Howrah Vide No. G/Safety/Audit /Revision /2019 dated 25.02.2019.  
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
559 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Indian  Railways  Disaster  Management  Plan, 2014  
VI) Instruction Guidelines  issued by the Railway  Board  
VII) Indian  Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code , 2016  
VIII) The Railway (Notices of and Inquiries into Accidents) Rules, 1998  
IX) Indian Railway accident Protocol60 
5.2 Important Risk  Parameters : 
Sl. 
No Activity  Risk  parameter  
1. Disaster  Management  
 1. Timely preparation of disaster management  
plan.  
2. Close monitoring  of disaster management  
plan.  
3. Preparedness for the same.  
4. Correct implementation  of disaster 
management  plan in case of disaster.   
2. Readiness of Accident  
Relief  Train  (ART ), 
Accident Relief 
Medical  Van (ARMV ) 
including mock  drills , 
full scale disaster drills 
etc. 1. Passenger  Safety , 
2. ART /ARMV  is sufficient to cope up the 
situation,  
3. All the conditions of ART /ARMV  have 
been fulfilled,  
4. Timely adherence of mock  drills  and full 
scale disaster drill . 
3. Preparation  of Safety  
Action Plan  1. Safety  management , 
2. Action proposed in safety  plan,  
3. Implementation of safety  plan,  
4.Provision  for appropriate  fund for 
implementation  of safet y plan,  
5. Involvement of expenditure . 
4.  Safety  issues related to 
Workshops , Loco  
Running  Staff  and 
Crew  Booking  Lobbies 
etc. 1. Safety  measures  taken by running  staff to 
prevent accident , 
2. Planning  for safety  measures  for 
workshops , running  rooms, crew booking  
lobbies,  
3. Proper  implementation  of the same,  
4. Involvement of expenditure . 
5. Conducting safety  audit  
in C&W depots , 1. Safety  management , 
2. Safety  audit  done as per norms , 
3. Safety  audit  done within time  frame,  
                                                           
60 RB letter No.2021/Safety (A&R)/26/5 dt 21.05.2021  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
560 
For internal use of IA&AD  lobbies, workshops  and 
PWI depots  etc. 4. Preventive  measures  taken as per safety  
audit  
6. All safety  stores , 
budget , financial  
matters, hired vehicles 
etc. 1. Justification  for procurement  of safety  
related stores , 
2. Timely procurement  of safety  related 
stores , 
3. Provision  of fund,  
4. Involvement of expenditure . 
7. Night  footplate and 
station inspections . 1. Inspections were carried out as per norms  
and time  schedules,  
2. Preventive  measures  taken as per outcome 
of inspection , if any,  
8. Conducting safety  
drive, compliances to 
Board  and issue  of 
Safety  Bulletin, Safety 
Rosters .  1. Safety  Management , 
2. Conduction safety  drives as per norms , 
3. Safety  Bulletins  and Safety posters issued 
as per prescribed  norms , 
4. Incorporating of latest orders, circulars  in 
Safety  Bulletins  and Posters , 
5. Involvement of expen diture . 
9. Issue  of safety  wall 
calendars, table 
calendars indicating 
different safety rules  
etc. and issue  of diaries 
as prepared by other 
railways.  1. Safety  Management , 
2. Safety  wall/table calendars issued as per 
prescribed  norms , 
3. Incorporation of latest 
orders/circulars /rules  in safety  wall/table  
calendar . 
4. Involvement of expenditure . 
10. Monitoring  on the 
progress of the safety  
related work . 1. Monitoring  on timely completion  of work . 
11. Compliance  of accident  
enquiry to CRS  and 
Railway  Board . 1. Preventive  measures  taken on compliance  
of accident  enquiry were taken for ensuring 
quick relief  and rescue  operation . 
12. Imparting training  and 
establishment matters.  1. Human  resour ce development , 
2. Allocation  of manpower , 
3. Safety  aspects,  
4. Payments as per relevant rules , 
5. Irregular drawl of increment , allowances , 
6. Overpayment,  
7. Development  of manpower . 
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
561 
For internal use of IA&AD  6. IT APPLICATION USED IN THE SAFETY DEPARTMENT  
A Safety  Information  Management  System  (SIMS ) has been introduced by the 
Centre  for Railway  Information Systems  (CRIS ) for quick information and 
disposal  of accident  cases. All accident  related data are being fed to the system  
by the Divisional  authority . 
While reviewing the data of the system , it is to be seen that no abnormal delay 
occurred in reporting a nd final disposal  of any accident  case.  
Accident enquiry reports available in SIMS may be analysed to see whether the 
recommendations of the enquiry committee have been implemented by issuing 
necessary instructions and als o any DAR action has been taken against the 
blameworthy  
7. CHECKS TO BE EXERCISED BY THE AUDIT AT 
DIFFERENT LEVELS:  
7.1 Railway  Board  Level:  
I) Whether the Disaster  Management  Plan of Indian  Railway  is being 
updated from time  to time , with due consideration of different safety  
aspects and changing scenario.  
II) Whether the implementation  of the Disaster  Management  Plan in all 
Zones are regularly monitored.  
III) Whether the different statistical data collected from any accident  site are 
properly analysed to prevent occurrence o f the same in future.  
IV) Whether safety  checks  are conducted regularly.  
V) Whether examination of reports  of departmental  enquiry conducted by 
Zonal  Railways  and re ported to Railway  Board  and follow up  of the same 
is being done by Rly. Board  along with necessary instruction and 
recommendations  in due time . 
VI) Wheth er the different modifications  of Coaches , Wagons  and 
Locomotives  as developed by RDSO  are properly implemented by the 
Zonal  Railways .  
7.2 Zonal  Railway  Headquarters  Level:  
I) Whether the inspection  programmes are strictly being followed,  
II) Whether steps have been taken to rectify the defects /deficiencies  pointed 
out by the inspectors,  
III) Whether follow -up actions are being taken to prevent those short -falls 
pointed out earlier,  
IV) Whether compliance  to various safety  drives has been followed,  
V) Whether accident  reporting and follow -ups are regularly being done 
without any time -lag and emergency  basis.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
562 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Whether Accident  Enquiry  and follow -ups are monitored till the closure 
of the case,  
VII) Whe ther measures  to be taken for prevention of disaster were spelt out in 
Zonal  Disaster  Management  Plans.  
VIII) Whether Disaster  Management  Plan (DM P) is duly updated periodically 
and properly implemented.  
IX) Whether Safety  Audit  and mock  drill are being conducted periodically.  
X) Whether the Accidents were investigated on time and recommendations 
of the enquiry authorities implemented towards prevention of such 
accidents in future?  
7.3 Divisional  Level:  
I) Whether the Corporate  Safety  Plans prepared and circulated by the 
Railway  Board  are strictly been followed,  
II) Whether surprise night  inspections  are regularly taken up and reports  are 
being submitted to the Division , 
III) Whether Inspection  of stations , RRI/PI Cabins  and L/C Gates  are being 
done regularly,  
IV) Whether Checking of Guard Brake  Van are being conducted regularly,  
V) Whether inspection  of Self -Propelled  Accident  Relief  Train  
(SPART )/Accident Relief Medical  Van (ARMV )/ Accident Relief Train 
(ART )/ 140 Ton Crane  etc. and Moc k Drills  are being conducted 
regularly,  
VI) The tendering  procedure and expenditures incurred by the Office  on 
account  of printing and publication of awareness posters/leaflets/boo klets 
etc. may be verified.  
VII) Whether measures  to be taken for prevention of disaster were spelt out in 
Divisional  Disaster  Management  Plans.  
VIII) Whether Disaster  Management  Plan (DMP) is duly updated periodically 
and properly implemented.  
IX) Whether Safety  Audit  are being conducted periodically.  
X) Whether Mock  drills  with NDRF  as per Railway  Board  directives are to 
be conducted.  
In addition to the above, Para 345 to 350  of India n Railway  Rolling  Stock  Code , 
2016 may also be consulted.  
*
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
563 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of Abbreviations  
Abbreviation  Full Form  
ARMV  Accident  Relief  Medical  Van 
ART  Accident  Relief  Train  
COM  Chief  Operating  Manager  
CRIS  Centre  for Railway  Information  System  
CRR  Centre  for Railway  Research  
CRS  Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  
CSO Chief  Safety  Officer  
DAR  Discipline and Appeal  Rule  
DMP  Disaster  Management  Planning  
DRM  Divisional  Railway  Manager  
DSO  Divisional  Safety  Officer  
Dy. CE Deputy  Chief  Engineer  
Dy. CME  Deputy  Chief  Mechanical  Engineer  
Dy. COM  Deputy  Chief  Operating  Manager  
Dy. CSO  Deputy  Chief  Safety  Officer  
Dy. CSTE  Deputy  Chief  Signal  and Telecommunication  Engine er  
ED Executive  Director  
GM General  Manager  
IR Indian  Railway  
IRITM  Indian  Railw ays Institute  of Transport  Management  
LC Level Crossing  
LHS  Limited  Height Subway  
MCDO  Monthly  Confidentia l Demi Official  
NDMA  National  Disaster  Management  Authority  
NDRF  National  Disaster  Response Force  
NIDM  National  Institute  of Disaster  Management  
PED  Principal  Executive  Director  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
564 
For internal use of IA&AD  PHoD  Principal  Head of the Department  
PI Panel  Interlocking  
PME  Probationer Mechanical  Engineer  
RDSO  Research  Design  and Standards  Organization  
ROB  Road  Over  Bridge  
RRI Route  Relay  Interlocking  
RTI Right  to Information  Act 
RUB  Road  Under  Bridge  
SPART  Self-Propelled  Accident  Relief  Train   
SPAD  Signal  passed at Danger  
TRR  Through Rail  Renewal  
TSR Through Sleeper  Renewal  
 
  
Chapter 15 – Audit of Safety  Department  
 
565 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
566 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER  16 - AUDIT OF SECURITY DEPARTMENT  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
Security  on Indian  Railways  (IR) is the joint respon sibility of the following 
agencies :- 
I) Railway  Protection  Force  (RPF ) and Railway Protection Special  
Force (RPSF )- a specialized armed wing) - Both these forces are und er 
the administrative control  of the Railway authorities . The RPF and RPSF 
primarily deal with the protection  of railway  property .  
The RPF  was constituted under the Railway  Protection  Force  Act 1957  as 
amended from time  to time . The RPF is empowe red under the Railway 
Act, 1989  to deal with offences such as alarm chain  pulling , roof top 
travelling , touting , ticketless  travel, unlawful  possession of railway  
property  etc. The RPF Act and the Railway Act were modified by 
Parliament  vide Act 52 of 2003 which e ntrusted  RPF with the following 
additional  duties:  
a) To protect and safeguard  railway  property , passenger  area and 
passengers . 
b) To rem ove any obstruction in the movement of Railway  property  or 
passengers  and  
c) To do any other act conducive to the better protection  and security  of 
railway  property , passenger  area and passengers . 
The main purpose of the amendment was to empower the RPF  to deal 
with minor offences which directly relate to the Railways  and to 
supplement  the efforts of the state governments to reinforce the security  
of the passengers  and passenger  area on the IR . RPSF  is a special  force 
organized in Battalion  pattern located in various parts of the country.   
II) Government  Railway  Police  (GRP ) – This wing is under the 
administrative control  of the respective State  Governments. The GRP is 
responsible for the law  and order problems between the outer signals of 
the stations  and prevention and detection  of crime [not covered  by the 
Railway Property {Unlawful  Possession} Act  and the Railway Act] in 
station premises and trains . This includes control  of passenger  and 
vehicular traffic  in station precincts; maintenance  of order in passenger  
trains . In addition, GRP is also required to enquire into accidents  on 
railways.  Fifty per cent (50%) of the expenditure  on GRP is shared by 
Railways  with respective states.   
Apart from the above , the State  Police  under the respective State Governments 
deal with the security  of tracks and bridges  over the Indian  Railways  and the law  
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
567 
For internal use of IA&AD  and order problems beyond the outer signals of the railway  stations .  Active co -
operation  and co -ordina tion between the IR  and the State Governments is 
essential to ensure safety  and security on Indian Railways .    
Hence, RPF  and RPSF  are the active wings under the admi nistrative control  of 
Railway  Authorities, which comes under the ambit of audit .  Further, transactions 
between Railways  and State  Governments rega rding operation  of GRP  also come  
under the purview of Audit .   
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF SECURITY 
DEPARTMENT  
The Security  department at Railway  Board  level is headed by the Director  
General  (RPF ) and assisted by Additional  Director General  (RPF) and Inspector  
General  (HQ), Inspector General (RPSF ) and Inspector General (Railway 
Security).  Further, Central  Crime  Bureau , Breeding -cum-training  centre for 
dogs , Central Weapon  Stores , Arms  Workshop  and One Training  Academy  also 
work  under the control  of Director General.   
RPF, at Zonal  Railway  Level is headed by Principal  Chief  Security  
Commissioner  duly assisted by Chief Security Commissioner  or no. of Chief 
Securit y Commissioners , if necessary.  At Divisional  level, there are Sr. 
Divisional Security Commissioners under the administrative control  of DRM  of 
the Division , duly assiste d by Inspector  of Police , Sub -Inspector of Police, Head 
Constables and Constables etc . at field level.   
RPSF , organized on battalion  pattern and the number of battalions a nd also their 
streng th and composition shall be such as may be determined by the Director  
General .  Each battalion shall function as a division and shall have at its head  an 
officer not bellow the rank of Commanda nt who shall be known as Commanding  
Officer.  A Commanding Officer shall be assisted by such number of other 
superior officers and enrolled numbers of the Force  as may be appointed from 
time to time .   
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
3.1 At Railway  Board  level  
I) Framing of rules  for recruitment , deputation , induction, training , 
placement, transfer, promotion , pay  and allowances , budget , discipline, 
Welfare , Grievances , education, sports, medical , provident  fund, pension, 
retirement  and post -retirement  benefits, welfare  schemes, funds, canteen 
and messes;   
II) Framing of policies and issue  of directives to zonal railwa ys and field 
units  for providing better protection  and security  to railway  property  and 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
568 
For internal use of IA&AD  advise the Central  Government , the State  Governments and the zonal 
railway  administration on all matters connected with railway  security;  
III) Drafting of all rules  necessary or incidental to the discharge of duties by 
the department under the Railwa ys Act and other Acts  framed  for 
protection  and security  of Railway  property /premises/passengers .   
3.2 At Zonal  Level  
I) Implementation of Act , rules  and Directives in respect of all establishment 
and welfare  matters through effective personnel and financial  
management  and inspec tion of branches;  
II) Arranging collection and dissemination of crime and special  intelligence 
affecting the security  and functioning of the railways, maintenance  of 
statistics, records a nd files  relating thereto;  
III) Devising ways  and means for reducing incidents of theft , pilferages, 
losses and shortages of booked consignments  
IV) Maintaining close liaison , on behalf of the railways, with the State  Police  
as well as the civil administration by holding meetings and conferences 
with his counterparts for ensuring better protection  and security  to the 
railway  property ;  
V) Advising the General  Manager  on all matters relating to the protection  
and security  of railway  property , fire prevention measures  and security of 
existing railway  installations, such as workshops , stores , sheds , tracks, 
yards , etc.  
3.3 At Division  level/field level  
I) Responsible for better protection  of railway  property , security  and smooth 
movement of trains  as well as for the efficient administration of th e Force ; 
II) Responsible for dealing with all establishment matters concerning the 
enrolled members of the Force ;  
III) Devising ways  and means for providing better protection  and security  to 
railway  property  in division and matters connected therewith and shall 
carry out such directions given by Principal  Chief  Security  
Commissioner /Chief Security Commissioner ;  
IV) Keeping close liaison  with the superior officers posted in the division, 
Post Commanders  and Company  Commanders for ensuring effect ive 
coordination  amongst them and to aid, advice or direct  their activities for 
providing better protection  and security  to railway  property .  
V) Inspecti on of the work  of Assistant  Security  Commissioners , all Railway  
Protection  Force  Posts, Companies, important out posts , detachments, etc. 
coming in his jurisdiction  and take such action  as may lie within his 
competence or issue  such directions as considered necessary to remedy 
existing defects  or to streamline the working.   
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
569 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Ensuring effective and result -oriented deployment  of Fore placed under 
his command;   
VII) Ensuring correct accountal of crime, thorough and prompt enquires for 
recovery of stolen  railway  property  and prosecution of offenders and 
receivers;   
VIII) Submitting reports  and returns  as may be called for including reports on 
subversive  and other objectionable  activities affecting the security  and 
functioning of the railway  noticed anywhere in divisions ; and  
IX) Ensuring full compliance  by all concerned of all directions and 
instructions  issued by the Director  General  or the Principal  Chief  Security  
Commissioner  concerned under the Act  and ru les.   
X) Registration  of cases under Railways  Act, RP (UP) Act and other crimes , 
conducting enquiry, recovery of the railway /passenger  property , etc.   
4. LIST OF ACTIVITIES   
(As per Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  2017 ) 
Level of unit  Main activity  Allied/ sub activity  
RB, Apex  
and Field 
Units  Protection  and Safeguarding 
of Railway  Property, 
passenger  area and passenger  
property  by implementing the 
Railway Act  and other Acts  1. Registration  of crimes  
2. Transfer  of crime cases  
3. Expunction  of Crime  
4. Procedure  for registration  
and disposal  of Railway  
Act Cases  
5. Cases of theft /pilferage  of 
booked consig nments  
6. Custody and disposal  of 
seized /recovered railway  
property  
7. Prevention  of large scale 
trespass  
8. Dealing of child  rescue  
cases  
9. Disaster  Management  
10. Liaison  with State  
Governments  
Apex  and 
Field Units  Order Police  1. Contribution  towards the 
cost of Order Police  
Apex  and 
Field Units  Manpower  Management   1. Recruitment  and 
Examinations  
2. Deployment  of Staff /Force  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
570 
For internal use of IA&AD  3. Training  
4. Deputation  of RPF  to 
Bandobast  duties and 
recovery of cost  
Apex  and 
field units  Pay and allowances , advances  
and other establishment 
matters;  1. Pay and allowances , 
advances  and other matters  
2. Adhoc  Bonus  
3. Ration  Money Allowance  
Apex  and 
field units  Plant  and Equipment  1. Arms  and Ammunition  
Apex  and 
field units  Contract  Management  1. Hiring  of vehicles  
2. Maintenance  and upkeep  
of service  buildings  and 
barracks  
3. Engagement  of home  
guards  and outsourcing  of 
security  arrangements;  
Apex  and 
field units  Other Expenditure  1. Imprest  (Vehicle  - Fuel) 
2. Imprest  (Vehicle  
Repairing)  
3. Dog squads  
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS:  
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters  of the Security  
Departme nt as per Compliance  Audit  Guidelines  2017 : 
I) Quantum  of Expenditure   
II) Number of Cases registered and disposed under Railway  Property 
(Unlawful  Possession) Act  etc. 
III) Number of Tender  cases/ Contract  cases/ other misc. cases.  
IV) When last audited  viz. audited  during  last one year/three year/five 
year/more than five year/never audited . 
V) Result  of last Audit . 
VI) Audit  perception based on News paper  publication, Complaints  lodged 
etc. 
VII) Untoward incidents happened;  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED  
No specific IT  applications  are being used by Securit y Department  except IPAS  
(Indian  Railway  Pay Roll and Accounting System ) for passing of salary bills  and 
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
571 
For internal use of IA&AD  IMMIS  (Integrate d Material  Management  and Information  System ) for stores  
transactions .   
7. AUDIT FOCUS AREAS -CHECK LIST  
7.1 Registration  of Crimes  
During its Audit , it should be seen that: - 
I) All cases of crimes  affecting the Railway  Property are entered at the Post  
where the crime is first detected either in the “Localized Crime  Register ” 
or in “Un -localized Crime Register”;  
II) In both the registers , crimes  are entered in chronological  order and 
numbered in seriatim;  
III) In respect of Localized Crime  Register , summaries  are prepared cause -
wise and commodity -wise for easy monitoring ; 
7.2 Transfer  of cases  
I) If a case is registered in “Un -localized Crime  Register ”, it should be seen 
that the Post  Commander  has made inquiries up to the place where 
criminal interference prima -facie appears to have been taken place and 
transferred the case to the Post having ju risdiction ;  
II) The Post  Commander  to whom the case has been transferred, has 
registered the case in “Localized Crime  Register ” and intimate the Crime 
Number to the Post concer ned;  
III) Whether quarterly meetings (January, April, June and October each year) 
are being conducted for reconciliation  of the transferred cases;  
7.3 Expunction  of Crime  
In all cases of expunction of crime,  it should be seen that - 
I) The case is expunged after thorough enquiry and after confirmation that 
no such offence actually took place;  
II) Whether orders of Sr. Divisional  Security  Commissioner  or Chief  
Security Commissioner  in case of special  cases have been obtained for 
expunction of crime;  
III) Local  police station has been informed where such case may have been 
registered;  
7.4 Registration  and disposal  of Railway  Act Cases  
RPF is empowered to register  and enquire offences envisaged under 29 sections 
of the Railway  Act 1989 .  Cases registered under this Act are classified  under two 
categories viz. (1) Petty cases – these cases are disposed by the Cour t immediately 
after the accused is/are produced before the Court (19 sections cover these 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
572 
For internal use of IA&AD  category of cases) (2) Non -Petty cases – these cases require detailed enquiry and 
prolonged prosecution, if necessary (10 sections cover the se category of cases).   
During audit  of the above cases, it should be seen  
I) Whether all the cases registered have been  informed to the 
Magistrate/Court  immediately after registration  of the case.   
II) Whether the enquiry has been completed within 15 days in respect of petty  
cases and 45 days in respect of non -petty  cases from the date of 
registration  of the case  
III) If the accused is/are not arrested within 30 days ( in respect of petty  cases) 
and within the extended period (in respect of non -petty  cases), permission 
of the competent  authority  has been obtained for closure of the case.   
IV) In respect of case s registered under Section  143, it should be seen that 
penalty  for unauthorized carrying of business of procuring and supply  of 
railway  tickets  has been levied?  
V) Whether the assi stance of IRCTC  is being obtained for tracing the IP 
Address/Personal  IDs in respect of cases registered under Section  143 
VI) Whether National  and Zonal  data bases of the accused pe rsons are being 
maintained?  
VII) Whether the review of cases of same accused committing offences again 
and again are being dealt with due care . 
VIII) Whether post  in-charge is monitoring  the progress of both pending  
enquiry and pending trail cases and corrective measures  are being taken 
accordingly.   
IX) Whether progress of all pending  enquiry and pending trail cases are 
reviewed by Gazetted  Officer during the inspection  of RPF  post/Out post.   
7.5 Cases of theft /pilferage  of booked consignments  
During the review of the cases, the following should be seen  
I) That present/market value was  taken into account  for ascertaining the 
value of the property  stolen  invariably in all cases of booked 
consignments ; 
II) That no deliberate attempt was made by the officials to manipulate  or 
undervalue  the stolen /missing  consignments ; 
7.6 Custody and disposal  of seized  or recovered property  
During check of the ses case, it should be seen that  
I) All seizers/recoveries  of railway  property  have been entered in the 
“Malkhana  Register ” and an entry has been made against concerned cas e 
in Crime  Register.   
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
573 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Whenever any property  is recovered, the same has been entered in 
“Localised  Crime  Register ” and not reflected in Railway  Property 
(Unlawf ul Possession) Act  Register;  
III) In case the seized  property  cannot be linked to the Railway  property , it 
should be seen that the same has been entered in Railway Pr operty 
(Unlawful  Possession) Act  Register ;  
IV) The procedure for custody and disposal  of seized  or recovered property  is 
in accordance with the provisions contained  in the Police  Regulations  of 
the State  in which the RPF  post is located.   
7.7 Prevention  of Large Scale  Trespass  
During Audit , it should be seen that  
I) Each Post  commander  maintains RPF /G-4 confidential  register  on “Fairs 
requiring RPF arrangements with brief appreciation of problems 
involved”;  
II) The information in  the register  is updated from time  to time ; 
III) Whenever any occasional large fairs/religious functions  are to be held 
near the Railway  track /Railway area, the informati on was conveyed to 
Divisional  authorities ;  
IV) Whether the proper  security  arrangements have been made to prevent any 
untoward incidents;  
7.8 Child  rescue  and protection  cases  
In order to rescue  the children  found unattended in railway  premises or railway  
trains , Standard  Operating  Procedure  (SOP ) has been issued for rescue of children  
in contact with railways.  During the audit  of these cases, it should be seen that  
I) Whether Child  Help Group  (CHG ) was formed at the notified stations  
(Station  House  Officer (GRP ) and Inspector  (RPF ) are the members of 
this group)?  
II) Whether the instructions  issued vide SOP  have been followed by the 
RPF? 
III) Whether action  has been taken by the RPF  to hand  over the child  to the 
nominated NGO  or Child  Help Desk/Kiosk of  Ministry  of Child and 
Women  Welfare ? 
IV) Whether training  programmes and Orientation/Sensitisation programmes 
on child  rescue  and child  protection  are being conducted at Zonal  level/ 
Divisional  level?  
V) Whether children  protection  awareness material  has been displayed in the 
stations ? 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
574 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.9 Disaster  Management  
As a caretaker of the security  over Railways , Security  Department  will play 
important role in rescue  operations  in case of disasters .  During the audit  of 
preparedness of the Security Department, it should be seen that  
I) Whether Disaster  Management  teams were formed with required men at  
Divisional  level?  
II) Whether staff are trained in Disaster  Management  operations ? 
III) Whether the equipment  required for rescue  operations  such as torch, ropes 
etc. have been provided as per the norms  prescribed ? Or any shortfalls?  
IV) Whether trained staff were  available for Bomb Detection and Disposal ? 
V) Whether name s of nearest fire  stations  and nearest hospitals have been 
prominently displayed?  
VI) Whether Standard  Operating  Procedure  has been drawn and circulated 
among the staff  for meeting the emergencies ? 
VII) Whether sufficient no. of mock  drills  have been conducted?  
7.10 Liaison  with Civil  Administration  of the State  
During the review of liaison  of RPF  with Civil  Administration  of the states, it 
should be seen whether  
I) Detailed  procedures are followed for holding periodical  meetings and 
conferences at different levels with officers in -charge of Railway  Police  
(Post  commander  level, Divisional  Security  Commissioner  level, Chief  
Security Commissioner  level  etc.);  
II) System  is in place for exchange of information for prevention and 
detection  of crime affecting Railway  property , activities of recovery of 
stolen  railway  property  etc.; 
III) Whether the minutes  of the crime meetings are recorded and distributed 
for reviewing the results and for  devising methods as are considered 
necessary for prevention of crimes ; 
7.11 Contribution  towards the cost  of Order Police  
50 per cent cost  of the GRP  is shared by the Rail ways  and the cost  will be booked 
to Grant  No. 80 Major  Head 3002 -03 (10) – Miscellaneous  working expenses  
under detailed head  -131.  The contribution  of Railways towards cost  of Order 
Police  to State  Government  is audited  to see  
I) Whether the amount to be contributed by Rail ways  has been arrived at as 
per the rules ?  Pay , allowances  and other elements have been taken 
correctly (as per Railway  Board  orders) for calculating the c ontribution ?  
II) Whether the arithmetical  accuracy  is correct?  
III) Whether the amount contributed has been accounted for in the Railway  
Accounts  correctly?  
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
575 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) In respect of a dditional  payments made to State  Governments regarding 
additional  police and village patrols employed on protection  of railway  
property  and during emerg encies , the justification  for the payments made 
should also be verified.   
7.12 Recruitment  
Generally, Railway  Recruitment  Board  conducts examination s and recruits the 
Railway personnel.  However, in respect of RPF  staff, recruitment  is done by the 
RPF Department  itself.  Extensive rules  have been laid  down in t he RPF Rules 
1987 (as amended from time  to time ) regarding the procedures to be f ollowed 
during the recruitment . The process of recruitment  may be audited  to see  
I) The require ment of posts  and vacancies  to be notified for recruitment  has 
been assessed based on the yard -sticks prescribed ? 
II) Whether the recruitment  has been as pe r the RPF  Rules  duly following 
the guidelines  given in respect of age, educational  qualifications, method 
of recruitment , procedure for filling up the posts , physical  standards  
required for the posts ? 
III) Whether the recruitment  process has been done without leaving scope  to 
any malpractices or impersonation?  
IV) Whether medical  examination has been conducted as per the prescribed  
standards ? 
V) Whether Agreement  has been executed with the joining person as 
prescribed  duly including the clause that if a  person fails to join the force 
after completion  of training  that the cost  of training  or three month ’s 
salary whichever is less will be recovered from the person?  
VI) In case of a ny fees collected during recruitment , whether proper accountal 
of such receipts  has been done?  
7.13 Deployment  of staff  
The security  staff are deployed for vari ous duties such as  
I) For security  of passenger  area and passengers  viz. Train  Escorting , Access  
Control , Surveillance Duty  on PFs etc.  
II) For protection  and security  of railway  property  viz. Seal Checking Duty  
(PFs/Yd), Patrolling  duty in Yard /Block  Section  etc.  
III) For other misc. duties viz. office duty  (Diary, Armourer, Head Moha rrir 
etc.) Mess , VIP  Movement, protocol etc.  
It should be seen that the deployment  of staff  has been done judiciously.  For this 
purpose, the trend of cases registered/untoward incidents happened for the last 
three years may be reviewed .  Deployment  of RPF  staff in case of accidents  or 
any untoward incidents may be reviewed to comment o *n any lacunae.   
Railway Audit Manual  
 
576 
For internal use of IA&AD  7.14 Training  
Apart from One Training  Academy , Zonal  RPF training  centres are also available 
in the zones to train the RPF staff .  The training  in respect of handling of arms , 
training  on various Acts  related to security /protection  of railway  property  and 
also soft skills are being imparted to RPF staff .  The training  activity is reviewed 
to see -  
I) Whether induction training  has been given to every RPF  personnel before 
induction in the force:  
II) Whether the st andards  of syllabus  and course are  according to the 
standards prescribed  by Railway  Board  from time  to time ? 
III) Whether the training  modules  are prepared  keeping the requirements and 
usefulness of the RPF  staff, which includes arms , first aid, psychology , 
criminology , disaster manager, liaison  with state police etc.   
IV) Whether the promoting officials have been given training  to suit their 
higher duties and responsibilities?  
V) Whether the staff  have passed in the tests (securing 50% of marks) 
conducted after the training  as prescribed  in RPF  rules ? In case of failure  
of any staff  after third attempt, act ion has been taken on the staff  as per 
RPF rules ? 
VI) Whether training  calendar  has been prepared in advance and all the slots  
given to various offices/posts  have been utilized?  Surrender of slots may 
be commented upon.   
7.15 Deputation  Staff  for bandobast  duties  
During several occasions such as elections, RPF  staff are deputed for ban dobast  
duties and the cost  of staff  are to be recovered from state/central  governments.  
The de putation  of staff  are for bandobast  duties and re covery of cost  of staff  are 
audited  to see  
I) Whether the bills  for recovery of cost  of sta ff deputed for b andobast  duties 
have been raised in time  on concerned state governments/central  
government?  
II) Whether all items to be included in the bill as per Railway  Board  
directiv es along with pay  and allowances  have bee n incorporated in the 
bill? 
III) Whether arithmetical  accuracy  is correct?  
IV) Whether the amounts have been recovered/realized from State 
Governments/ Central  Government  regularl y and within a reasonable 
time? 
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
577 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) In case of huge outstanding , whether follow up  action  is being taken by 
Railway  Administration  for realization of the s ame?  
VI) Whether the outstanding  amounts are being shown in suspense  or any 
other register  for monitoring  and clearance is being done as and when the 
amounts are realized?  
7.16 Pay and allowances , advances  and other establishment bills  
All departments  of Railways  process their pay  bills through Personnel  
Department .  However, Security  Department process their pay  bills and other 
bills on their own and directly sent to Accounts  Department.  The following are 
various items to be c hecked in Audit  while reviewing the pay  bills and other 
allowances  bills of security  Department.   
I) Pay Bills  
II) Travelling  Allowance  Bills 
III) Fixation  of pay  
IV) Fixation /Payment of Pension  
V) Leave  Accounts  
VI) Service  Records  
VII) Pass and PTOs  
VIII) House  Building Advances, Personal  Computer  Advances and other 
advances  
IX) PF accounts , advances , withdrawals etc.   
X) Medical  Attendance  Bills  
(The above items may be audited  in accordance with the checks  prescribed  
in the Chapter of “RAM -PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT”).   
7.17 Adhoc  Bonus  
Railway  employees  are paid Productivity  Linked Bonus  (PLB) whereas the RPF  
staff are paid adhoc bonus .  The adhoc bonus  bills are to be checked to see  
I) The individual employee receiving the bonus  is eligible for the same;  
II) In case of unauthorized absence/suspension , bonus  is not allowed till 
regularization of the absence.;  
III) Whethe r the bonus  reduced to the extent of absent days;  
IV) Arithmetical Accuracy of the bill need to be checked;  
7.18 Ration  Money Allowance  
Non-gazetted  RPF Staff  are eligible for payment of Ration  Money Allowance  up 
to the rank of Inspector  Grade -I at par with Central  Para Military Force /Central 
Armed Police  Force. The rates of the Ration Money Allowances  per day to be 
paid to RPF staff  are revised from time  to time  by the Railway  Board .  The audit  
of Ration Money Allowances paid to the RPF staff  is to be conducted to see  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
578 
For internal use of IA&AD  I) The person to whom the ration  money allowance is paid is eligible for the 
same as per RB  instructions ;  
II) The r ates adopted are correct and as per the instructions  of Railway  Board ; 
III) No allowance has been paid for the period in which the staff  are on Leave  
on Average  Pay, Commuted  Leave, Maternity Leave and Paternity Leave;   
IV) The amount paid towards ration  money allowance has been taken as 
income  for the purpose of levy /deduction of tax ; 
7.19 Arms  and Ammunition  
The RPF  staff are provided with arms  as they have to perform security  duties and 
the RPF posts  are also equipped with ammunition .  The account  of arms  and 
ammunition  should be checked to see  
I) Proper  security  arrangements exist for safe  custody of arms  and 
ammun ition in the barracks /posts ; 
II) All weapons  and ammunition  will be issued or deposited under the 
supervision of an officer who is well -versed with weapon handling;  
III) Whether p rescribed  procedure for depositing and issuing of the weapons  
is being followed:  
IV) Whether the arms  and ammunition  has been provided as per the 
prescribed  percentage  of sanctioned  strength  of Zonal  Railways : 
V) Whether 10 per cent reserve ammunition  has also been provided;  
VI) Whether physical  verification  of the arms  and ammunition  is being done 
periodically:  
VII) Whether there is system  in place for maintenance  and upkeep  of arms ;  
VIII) Whether posters dep icting the methodology  of handling weapons  and 
booklets on safety  of arms  and ammunition  and precautionary measures  
to be taken while handling the arms  have been displayed prominently in 
the posts  and circulated to the staff ;  
IX) Whether the consumption  of ammunition  during Annual  Range 
Classification  is within the limits prescribed  by Railway  Board ? 
X) Whether the procedure laid  down for disposal  of used empty  fire 
cartridges is being fo llowed;  
7.20 Contract  Management  
No major  contracts  are awarded by Security  Department .  The installation of 
Integrated  Security System , construction  of boundary wall, Procurement  of 
CCTV  cameras, baggage scanners etc. are being done by Civil  Engineering  and 
Signal  and Telec ommunications  Departments , in respect of which, Principal  
Chief  Security Commissioner  participates in identification  of locations for 
installation of security  systems and tender  proceedings.  However, if any, major 
works  are executed by Security Department through contracts ; the audit  should 
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
579 
For internal use of IA&AD  be d one as per the checks  prescribed  in the chapter of “RAM -Engineering 
Department”.   
At present, the contracts  awarded by Security  Department  are related to H iring  of 
vehicles, Maintenance /Upkeep of office buildings /barracks , Engagement  of 
Home -guards  and Outsourcing  of security  arrangements; The audit  of these 
contracts  may be audited  specifically to see  
I) Whether proper justification  exists for hiring of vehicles, outsourcing  the 
works  of maintenance  of office buildings /barracks  and engagement  of 
home  guards /outsourcing  of security  arrangements . For this purpose, the 
vehicles already available and the requirement of additional  vehicles may 
be reviewed.  Staff  position/vacancies  are to be linked with the 
justification  given for outsourcing  of the maintenance  of 
buildings /barracks and security arrangements;  
II) Whether Railway  Board ’s instructions  such as minimum kilometres, 
reserve price etc. in respect of hiring of vehicle  have been complied with;  
III) Whether the vehicle  is being used for minimum number of kilometres for 
which the contract  has been entered  into;  
IV) Whether log book of the vehicle  is being maintained with signatures  of 
persons authorised to do so;  
V) Whether the contractual conditions have been complied with during 
execution  of work  by the contractor; if not, whether penalties  as laid  down 
in the agreement have been levied in case of failure  in adhering to the 
contractual conditions;  
VI) While outsourcing  the activities  of maintenance  of office 
buildings /barracks , security  arrangements etc.  the requirement of men 
has been assessed properly based on the volume of work  involved;  
VII) Whether the expenditure  is booked to correct head  of allocation ;  
7.21 Imprest  (Fuel  and Repairing of vehicles).  
I) Whether the imprest  sanctioned  is suffic ient for meeting the expenditure  
for fuel and repairing of the vehicles available?  
II) Whether the imprest  sanctioned  is not being utilized for longer periods, in 
case of which,  possibility of reduction in  the amount of imprest is to be 
examined ;  
III) Whether recoupment  of imprest  is being done periodically;  
IV) Whether the recoupment  request is supported by the vouchers  of 
expenditure  and the veracity of the vouchers  is also to be checked;  
V) Frequent repairing of vehicles resulting in huge expenditure  on repairs  
should be reviewed to see whether procurement  of new  vehicle  is 
economical when compared to cost  of expenditure ;  
VI) The expenditure  has been booked to correct head  of allocation ;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
580 
For internal use of IA&AD  VII) The expe nditure  has proper sanction of competent  authority ;  
VIII) It should be seen that the general imprest  sanctioned  for office 
expenditure  has been kept s eparate from imprest -vehicle  – fuel and 
repairs .  
7.22 Dog squads  
The RPF  is provided with dog squads, where dogs  are procured and maintained 
in kennels .  On upkeep  of kennels  and feeding of dogs, RPF incurs expenditure .  
In Audit , it should be seen that  
I) Whether dogs  have been provided as per prescribed  norms ;  
II) Whether provisions laid  down in Standing  Order for maintenance  of       
kennels  and dog squad  have been adhered to;  
III) Whether the history sheet of each dog is being maintaine d duly entailing 
the details of breed, age, health  condition etc.   
IV) Whether imprest  register  is being maintained for dog food (checks  
prescribed  in respect of imprest may als o be exercised);  
V) Whether the handlers of dogs  appointed have fulfilled all the eligibility 
criteria ? 
VI) Whether sufficient explosives available for practice  of dogs ? 
VII) Whether all the dog equipment , kennel equipment  and dog ration  is 
available and the record of dog ration  is also to be checked;  
7.23 Stores  transactions  
The security  department has very limited stores  transactions such as submission 
of indents  for HSD  oil and general stores  etc.  For this purpose, RPF  utilizes the 
Integrated  Material  Manageme nt Information  System  (IMMIS ) for indenting, 
receipt  and accounting of stores .  These transactions may be checked a s per the 
checks /queries pr escribed  in Chapter 13 – Audit  of Stores  Department .   
8. REGISTERS TO BE CHECKED  
The following registers  should be reviewed during the audit  of Security  
Department .   
I) Arms  Stock  Book  
II) Ammunition  Stock  Book  
III) Daily  Arms  and Ammunition  Issue  and Return  
IV) Deficiency  Message  Register  
V) Crime  Registers for booked consignments  (Localised  and Un -
localised)  
VI) Crime  Register  for theft  of fittings  from rolling stock  
VII) Crime  Register  for theft  of Railway  Material  (except fitting from 
Rolling  stock ) (Localised  and Un -Localised ) 
VIII) Crime  register  pertaining to arrest in trespass and non -specific cases  
Chapter 16 – Audit of  Security  Department  
 
581 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) Register  of special  reports  
X) Cases of RP  (UP) Act  Register  
XI) Register  of railway  criminals  
XII) Case property  register  
XIII) Final report on theft /pilferage  of booked consignments  
XIV)  Final report on theft /loss of railway  property  
XV) Seal Memo  book  
XVI)  Seal/Rivet/Lock Checking certificate  
XVII)  Defective  Wagon  checking Register  
XVIII)  Register  of shortages from seal intact wagons  (inward and outward)  
XIX)  Muster  Roll 
XX) Duty  Roster  
XXI)  Duty  Deployment  Register  
XXII)  Casual  Leave  Register  
XXIII)  Leave  Register  other than Casual  Leave  
XXIV)  Reward Register  
XXV)  TA Register  
XXVI)  Grieva nce Register  
XXVII)  Daily  Diary (Roznamcha)  
XXVIII)  Inward  receipt  and disposal  register  
XXIX)  Inspection  Report  Book  
XXX)  Register  of quarters  in occupation of RPF  staff 
XXXI)  Clothing  stock  book  
XXXII)  Kit book  
XXXIII)  Memorandum  of kit inspection  
XXXIV)  Mess  registers  
XXXV)  Imprest  Registers (Vehicle -Fuel and Repairs ) 
XXXVI)  General  Imprest  Register  
XXXVII)  Malkhana  Register  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
582 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
583 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER 17 - CENTRE FOR RAILWAY INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Centre  for Railway  Information  Systems  (CRIS ) is a society registered under the  
Societies  Registration  Act XXI, 186061. It was established  on 1st July 1986 as an 
autonomous  organization  under the Ministry  of Railways . It is a project oriented 
organization and plays the role of IT  Service  Provider to the Indian  Railways  
(IR). CRIS has its headquarter  at Chanakyapuri, New  Delhi . It has five regional  
offices at Delhi, Mumbai , Chennai , Kolkatta & Se cunderabad  besides two site 
offices62. CRIS is financed mainly by the Ministry of Railways. CRIS has its own 
rules  & regulations  and bye -laws for managing its affairs and has its own 
recrui tment  rules .  
2. CRIS  ORGANIZATION  
CRIS  has a two tier management  structure for managing its activities.  
 
 
 
CRIS  is governed by the Governing  Counc il (GC) with Minister  of Railways  as 
its Chairman .  The GC63 is the executive  body of the CRIS and conducts 
administration and management  of CR IS with the assistance of an Executive  
Committee  (EC). The EC64 is at second tier with Member  (Operations and 
Business Development ) /Railway  Board  as its Chairman. Registrar (CRIS) is ex -
officio Secretary  to the GC/EC. The GC determines policy  for the guidance  of 
                                                           
61CRIS  Bye-laws 
62 located at Patna and Port  blair  
63the GC consists of not less than 10 and not more than 16 members. (Para  4.1 of chapter 2(CRIS  bye-laws)), 
4the EC  consists of not less than five and not more than 14 members. Para 5 of chapter 2 (CRIS  bye-laws)) 

Chapter  17 –Centre for Railway Information Systems  
 
584 
For internal use of IA&AD  CRIS, frame bye -laws65 and consider s such other matters wh ich are brought to 
its notice.   
The Managing Director66 is responsible to carry on the work  of the CRIS  under 
the control  of the GC and advice of EC , in accordance with  the  Ru les  and  bye-
laws  for  the  administration  and management   of  the CRIS and is supported by 
Director  (Operations ), Director (P assenger  Services ) and Director (Finance ) .  
Apex , Audit  and Implementing  Units  
Being an autonomous  body (AB), implementing units  itself is CRIS . As such 
Apex  & Implementing  units does not exist separately.  
CRIS  deals with Computerization  & Information  System  (C&IS ), Directorate  of 
Ministry  of Railways  (Railway  Board ) for IT  related matters . The C&IS 
Directorate is responsible for implementation  of project s, charged to plan head  
Computerization , on Indian  Railway.  
3. ACTIVITIES  PERFORMED BY CRIS  (HEADQUARTERS & 
REGIONAL OFFICES)  
The main objectives  of CRIS  are to undertak e design , development , 
implementation  and maintenance  of computerized  IT applications  for Indian  
Railways  and also executes works /projects  relating to procurement , installation 
and maintenance  of computers, communication  equipment , system  software  and 
networking systems, essential for Railway  operations  and services.  CRIS 
manages a large number of IT applications  pertaining to various department s67 of 
Indian Railways . CRIS ma nages Ministry  of Railways  IT projects  in the field of 
passenger  ticketing, freight  operations , train d ispatching and control , parcel  
management , crew management , financial  management , e-procurement , energy  
management , production  of rolling stock , management  of Railways’ fixed  and 
moving assets  etc. CRIS has also undertaken consultancy /services  projects  of 
other Corporations such as Indian Railway Catering  and Tourism  Corporation , 
Container  Corporation of India  Ltd., Shipping Corporation of Anda man 
&Nicobar, Steel  Authority  of India Ltd. etc.  CRIS manages various websites of 
Indian Railways. CRIS achieves its objectives  with the support  of its various 
departments68.  
                                                           
65 Para  12 of ch apter 2 of CRIS  bye-laws 
66 Para  4.2 of chapter 3 of CRIS  bye-laws 
67like Commercial , Operating , Finance  & Accounts , Person nel/Administration , Civil  Engineering , Mechanical  
Engineering, Electrical  Engineering, Medical  etc. 
68Like General  Administration , Personnel , HRD, Finance , Accounts , Procurement /Purchase , Civil , Electrical , 
Communication  Networking, Corporate  Coordination  and various IT  Groups (including Information  & Security  
Group ). 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
585 
For internal use of IA&AD  CRIS  Regional /Site  offices  
CRIS  Regional  offices /Site offices  are responsible mainly for maintenance  of 
various IT  application  softw are/providing support  to Railway  Administration  in 
ensuring smooth operations  of IT applications .  Regional offices also arrange 
training  for various IT application  users.  
4. CRIS  IT APPLICATIONS (INTERNAL ) 
In order to manage its various internal  operations /activities, CRIS  has developed 
three IT  applications  though in -house  efforts. These applications  are online , web  
based, operated in Internet /Intranet  environment and are interlinked  with each 
other.  
I) CRIS  Pay Roll Processing System  (Pay Roll)  
II) CRIS  Financial  Accounting System  (FAS ) 
III) CRIS Employees  Self Service  Module  (ESS ) 
CRIS  manages/maintains its own website (www.cris.org.in).  
5. MANDATE FOR AUDIT OF CRIS  
Arrangement for audit  of accounts  of CRIS  is made by the Ministry  of Railways  
(CRIS Management ) in consultation with C&AG  of India  and the audit of CRIS 
accounts  is assigned by the Ministry of Railways under section  20(1) of the 
C&AG (DPC ) Act , 1971 for a period of five years.  Audit  under section  20(1) is 
essentially taken up for certification  of accounts  but certification of accounts  also 
includes compliance  audit and performance /IT audit69.  However, the Separate  
Audit Report  issued under s ection  20(1) contains ‘comments  on accounts ’ only. 
Certification  of Accounts  
Certification  Audit  refers to an independent  Auditor ’s opinion  on the reliability 
of some assertions  made by the audited  entity. The opinion given by the Auditor 
could be on the  set of financial  statements prepared by the entity or part of a 
financial  statement.  
Format  of Accounts  and Components  of Financial  Statements  
CRIS  is required to compile its accounts  in the Uniform  Format  of Accounts70 
prescribed  by the Govt . of India  (Ministry  of Finance ).. The format of accounts  
has been prepared keeping in view the Accounting Standards  (AS) issued by the 
Institute  of Chartered Accountants  of India (ICAI ). A list of Accounting 
                                                           
69 For PA and IT  Audit , refer to Performance  Audit Guidelines  and Manual  on Information  Technology  Audit  I , 
II & III and other guidelines /instructions   issued from time  to time  by C&AG  of India  
70Available at  http://cga.gov.in/writereaddata/Uniform _format_of_Accounts .pdf and http://audit .delhigovt.nic.in  
(Under  guidelines ))  
Chapter  17 –Centre for Railway Information Systems  
 
586 
For internal use of IA&AD  Standards  issued by the ICAI is given in Annexure ‘A’ of this chapter.  The 
annual  financial  statements of CRIS consist of the following state ments, prepared 
and presented in the format and in the manner as prescribed  in the uniform  format 
of accounts :- 
I) Balance  Sheet  
II) Income  & Expenditure  Account  
III) Schedules  to the above financial  statements ( I and II above)  
IV) Disclosure  of significant Accounting policies  
V) Disclosure  of other information thr ough ‘Notes  on Accounts ’ 
VI) Statement of Receipts  & Payments   
Each compo nent of the financial  statement  is required to contain financial  
informatio n for the current  year along  with corresponding figures for the previous 
year. The amounts are to be rounded off as per the instructions  given in the 
uniform  format of accounts . 
The main  objectives  of carrying out audit  of Annual  Financial  Statements are: - 
I) to carry out an independent  examination of the financial  statements of 
CRIS  for the purpose of expressing an opinion  thereon;  
II) to ensure that the statements are prepared in accordance with the generally 
accepted accounting principles /applicable financial  reporting framewo rk 
(Uniform  Format  of Accounts ). 
Salient Features/Accounting Principles  & Instructions  of the Uniform  
Format  of Accounts71 
I) All significant accounting policies adopted in preparation of financial  
statements should be disclosed and the same should be applied 
consistently from one -financial  year to the next, otherwise financial  
implications of any change (if material )  in the accounting policy  in the 
year should be quantified as far as possible and disclosed in the financial  
statement.  
II) The relevance of information is affected  by its materiality. In determining 
the accounting treatment and manner of disclosure of an item in the 
balance  sheet and/or Income  & Expenditure  Account , due consideration 
shall be given t o the concept of materiality72. 
III) Provision  shall be made for all known liabilities  and losses even though 
the amount cannot be determined with substantial accuracy . Provision 
shall also be made for conti ngent  loss. 
                                                           
71 Source : Uniform  Format  of Accounts  
72A matter is regarded as material  if its inclusion or non -disclosure  is likely to distort the overall view of the accounts  
and influence decision of its intended user.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
587 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Revenue73 shall not be recognized  unless  the related performance  has 
been achieved, and property  in the goods  along  with all si gnificant risks  
and rewards  of ownership have been transferred for price. No significant 
uncertainty exists regarding the amount of the receivable consideration 
and it is not unreasonable to expect the realization and ultimate  collection 
of the amount of revenue.  
Risk  Assessment  
The purpose of assessing risk  is to determine areas of high  risk to help develop 
an effective audit  approach and to design  audit procedure to ensure that the audit 
risk is reduced to an acceptably low level. This activity involves assessment  of 
the risk of material  misstatement  at the financial  statement level and at the 
assertions  level for classes of transactions, accounts  balances and disclosures  so 
as to provide basis for designing and performing further audit procedures.  The 
understand ing of CRIS  and its operations  helps in identifying specific risk factors.  
Audit  Procedures  
There are generally two different types of procedures used in audit  programs :- 
Control  Procedures : Control procedures are tests designed to obtain 
reasonable assurance that the internal  controls on which reliance is to be placed 
are operating effectively during the period  under  examination.  
Substantive Procedures : Substantive procedures are designed to obtain 
evidence as to completeness, accuracy  and validity of the data produced by the 
accounting  system . Two substantive  audit  techniques  are Analytical  Review 
and Substantive Test of Details.  
Analytical  Review:  Analytical Review  is a substantive  procedure used to 
detect monetary errors  in financial  statements given that they have occurred 
(inherent risk74) and have not been detected by internal  controls. (control  
risk75).  
Substantive  test of details consists of examining samples of transactions or 
account  balances.  
                                                           
73 Uniform  format of Accounts  
74Inherent risk  is the susceptibility of an account  balance  or class of transactions to misstatement  that could be 
material , individually or when aggregated with misstatements in other balances or classes, assuming that there 
were no related internal  controls.  
75Control  Risk is the risk  that a misstatement  that could occur in an account  balance  or class of transactions and 
that could be mater ial individually or when aggregated with misstatements in other balances or classes, will not be 
prevented or detected and corrected on a timely basis by the accounting and internal  control  systems.  
Chapter  17 –Centre for Railway Information Systems  
 
588 
For internal use of IA&AD  The guidelines  framed /instructions  issued by Headquarters  office76 from time  to 
time for audit  of financial  statements (Balance  Sheet , Income  & Expenditure  
Account , Receipts  & Payments  Accounts , various schedules etc.) will be 
followed.  
6. COMPLIANCE AUDIT  
The scope  of audit  of CRIS  includes regularity audit. It embraces audit of 
financial  systems and transactions to check the compliance  with applicable 
statutes and regulations  and observance of probity and propriety . The main 
objectives  of Compliance  audit are to  ensure that:  
I) there is a provision of funds for the expenditure  duly authorized by a 
competent  authority ; the expenditure  is in  accorda nce with a sanction 
properly accorded and is incurred by an officer competent to incur it; 
II) payment has been  made  to the proper person,  has been  so acknowledged  
and recorded t hat a second claim on the same account  is impossible;  
III) the charge is correctly classified , and that if a charge is debitable to the 
personal account  of a contractor, employee or other individual, or is 
recoverable  from him under any rule or order, it is recorded as such in 
a prescribed  account ; 
IV) in the case of audit  of receipt (a)sums  due are regularly  recovered and 
checked against demand and (b) sums received are duly brought to 
credit  in the accounts ; 
V) expenditure  conforms to the following general principles , which have, for 
long, been recognized  as standards  of financial  propriety , namely :- 
a) the expenditure  is not prima - facie more than the occasion demands,  
and that every  employee  of the entity  exercise the same vigilance  in 
respect of expenditure  incurred fr om public  moneys as a person of 
ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of expenditure  of his 
own money;  
b) no authority  exercises its powers of sanctioning expenditure  to pass 
an or der, which will be directly or indirectly to its own advantage,  
c) public  monies are not utilized for the benefit of a particular person 
or section  of the community unless the amount of expenditure  
involved is insignificant; or a claim for the amount could be enforced 
in a court  of law ; or the expenditure  is in pursuance of a recognized  
policy  or custom , 
d) the amount of allowances  such as travelling  allowance granted to 
meet expenditure  of a particular type is so regulated that the 
                                                           
76 Manual  of Instructions  on Audit  of Autonomous  Bodies , Practice Notes  on Financial  Attest  Audit of Autonomous 
Bodies  issued vide PPG Practice Note NO. 310 16/PPG -II//2017 dated  25 October 2017, Chapter 3, 4 and 8 of 
Regulation on Audit and Accounts  (2020)  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
589 
For internal use of IA&AD  allowances are not on the whole a source of profit  to the recipient . 
In compliance  audit , following points need to be examined : 
I) non-compliance  to laws , rules , lacuna in law/procedure, policy  
regularity issues,  
II) violation of contract ual obligations, undue  favours to contractors , 
III) avoidable /excess expenditure ,  wasteful/ infructuous expenditure , delay 
in commissioning  of equipment , non -achievement of objectives  etc. 
IV) the check list prescribed /instructions /guidelines  issued by Headquarters  
office in respect of compliance  audit  will be followed during compliance 
audit of CRIS77. 
6.1  Checks  at Regional  Offices  
I) Whether duty  register  of officers/staff  has been mainta ined at Regional  
offices and officers/staff  were aware of their roles and responsibilities?   
II) Whether CRIS  client’s (Railway ’s) request for 
upgradation/modification /changes in  the application  software  were 
carried in accordance with the prescribed  Changed Management  
Procedure  and changes were released online  by the author ized official(s) 
after adequately testing  the software , obtaining requisite approval  from all 
concerned and ensuring compliance  with CRIS’s IT  Security  Policy ? 
III) Whether systems installed at CRIS ’s regional /site offices or systems 
under the jurisdiction  of CRIS’s regional /site offices were maintained as 
per the MoU  execu ted with Railway  Administration /as per terms and 
conditions of their maintenance  contract ? 
IV) Whether T&P/Assets  Register  (hard/soft form -if required) was properly 
maintained and all the relevant entries required to be entered in the 
register  were entered into it?  
7. EV ALUATION OF INTERNAL  CONTROL MECHANISM  
Evaluation of Internal  Control  Mechanism is essential because an assurance on 
Internal Control System  is included in  an ‘Annexure’ to  the Separate  Audit  
Report . The evaluation  is aimed at assessing whether inte rnal control  system  is 
adequate and commensurate with the size and nature of the CRIS  and to identify 
deficiencies /weakness in the system  and to provide recomm endations  for 
improvement/strengthening of internal  control  system . The issues/areas that 
would have to be addressed in internal  control  evaluation78 are as under:  
I) Whether the internal  control  system  is designed to provide a reasonable 
assurance of fulfilling accountability obligations, complying with laws  
                                                           
77 Chapter 4 and 5 of Compliance  Audit Guidelines  issued by C&AG  office   
78For details, refer  to Internal  Control  Evaluation  Manual  issued by C&AG  of India . 
Chapter  17 –Centre for Railway Information Systems  
 
590 
For internal use of IA&AD  and rules , orderly conduct of operations  in an ethical, economical, 
efficient and effective manner and safeguarding of assets  against losses?  
II) Whether Governing  Council  held at least on e meeting in a financial  year 
to review and monitor the activities of CRIS79 and Executive  Committee  
held at least one meeting in every quarter (minimum four meetings in a 
financial  year) to review and monitor the activities of CRIS and to take 
remedial  measure, as deemed fit to achieve aims and objectives  of CRIS?  
If not, how this has affected the working of CRIS80? 
III) Whether any addition/a lteration/modification  to the CRIS  bye-laws/rules  
& regulations  were approved  by the Governing  Council81? Whether t here 
was a clear delegation of power  amongst the various level of 
management ? Whether any delegation of power , functions  and duties to 
any officer/CRIS member by the Managing Director  was in accordance 
with the prior approval  of GC/EC  for delegation to lower authorities ? 
IV) Whether IT  Controls were in place for CRIS  computerized  systems?  
V) Whether Cash  Book was maintained in the prescribed  form? Whether 
every transaction was supported by an authentic voucher  and vouchers  
were serially numbered?  
8. ADEQUACY OF INTERNAL  AUDIT SYSTEM  
An assessment  of internal  audit  system , which is an essential part of the Internal  
Control  Mechanism, is aimed at examining whether  internal  audit system  is 
adequate and commensurate with the size and nature of CRIS  and to identify 
deficiencies /weakness in the system  and to provide recommendations  for its 
improvement/strengthening. It should, inter alia, be seen: - 
I) Whether internal  audit  wing is established  in the CRIS  and covered  all 
activities/wings of CRIS? Whether internal  audit wing is reporting to the 
top management /head  of the CRIS or not?  
II) Whether internal  audit  findings are promptly issued to the concerned 
wings and the ir response received timely?  Outstanding  internal  audit 
paras (if any) should be reviewed. Whether corrective measures  are being 
taken on the findings of internal  audit by the CRIS  management ? 
  
                                                           
79Para  1.1.1 and 1.1.2 of CRIS  bye-laws/rules  & regulations  (Chapter 3)  
80 Para  7 of chapter II of CRIS  bye-laws/rules  & regulations  
81 Para  12 of chapter II and Para 4.1(d)  & (e) of chapter III of C RIS bye-laws/rules  & regulations  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
591 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure ‘A’  
List of ICAI  Accounting Standards  (Effective in 2019)  
AS 1  Disclosure  of Accounting Policies  
AS 2  Valuation of Inventories  
AS 3  Cash  Flow Statements  
AS 4  Contingencies  and Events Occurring After Balance  Sheet  Date  
AS 5 Net profit  or Loss for the period, Prior  Period Items and Changes in 
Accounting Policies  
AS 7  Construction  Contracts  
AS 9  Revenue  Recognition  
AS 10  Property. Plant  and Equipment  
AS 11  The Effects of Changes in Foreign  Exchange Rates  
AS 12  Government  Grants  
AS 13  Accounting for Investments  
AS 14  Accounting for Amalgamations  
AS 15  Employee Benefits  
AS 16  Borrowing Costs  
AS 17  Segment  Reporting  
AS 18 Related Party Disclosures  
AS 19  Leases  
AS 20 Earnings  Per Share  
AS 21 Consolidated  Financial  Statements  
AS 22  Accounting for Taxes on Income  
AS 23 Accounting for Investments  in Associates  
AS 24  Discontinuing Operations  
AS 25 Interim Financial  Reporting  
AS 26 Intangible Assets  
AS 27 Financial  Reporting of Interests in Joint  Ventures  
AS 28 Impairment of Assets  
AS 29 Provisions, Contingent  Liabilities and Contingent Assets   
Note: Accounting Standards  AS- 6, AS -8, AS -30, AS -31 and AS -32 are no longer effective as these have 
been either covered  by other AS (AS -10, AS -26, AS -11, AS -13) or have b een withdrawn  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter  17 –Centre for Railway Information Systems  
 
592 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
593 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER -18- RAIL  LAND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
1. BRIEF ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT  
Rail Land Development  Autho rity (RLDA ) is a Statutory  Authority, under the 
Ministry  of Railways , set-up by an amendment to the Railways Act , 1989, for 
development  of va cant Railway  Land for commercial  use for the purpose of 
generating revenue by non -tariff measures . RLDA was constituted in terms of 
Extraordinary Gazette Notification dated 31.10.2006, as amended on 5.1.2 007. 
The Rules  for functioning of RLDA have been notified in the Extraordinary 
Gazette dated 4.1.2007.Land which is not required for operational  purposes in the 
foreseeable fut ure would be identified by the Zonal  Railways and the details 
thereof would be conveyed to Railway Board . Such plots of land  would thereafter 
be entrusted  to RLDA by Railway Board  in phases for commercial  development . 
2. ORGANISATION  HIERARCHY  OF RLDA  
The Executive  Board  of RLDA  consists of Member  (Infrastructure )/Railways  
Board as  ex-officio  Chairman , who is assisted by Vice Chairman , four 
Members82, eight General  Managers , five Chief Project  Manager s, two Executive 
Directors and other supporting staff . 
3. ROLES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIE S OF THE DEPARTMENT  
In terms of Section  4(D) of the Railways  Act 1989 , RLDA  has to discharge 
functions  & exercise such powers of the Central  Govt . in relation to the 
development  of Railway  land as are specifically assigned to it by the Railway 
Board . In terms of section  4E of the Act, specifically subject to such directions 
as may be given to it by Central Government , RLDA has been empowered to 
enter into agreement on behalf of Central Government and execute  contracts . 
Apex , Audit  and Implementing  Units  
Being an autonomous  body (AB), implementing units  itself is RLDA . As such 
Apex  & Implementing  units does not exist separately.  
4. ACTIVITIES  
The following activities are being carried by RLDA : 
I) Commercial  Development  of vacant Railway  Land  
II) Construction  of Multi  Functional Complexes  (MFCs ) 
III) Redevelopment  of Stations  
IV) Redevelopment  of colonies  
                                                           
82Member  Planning , Member Revenue, Member Project and Member business development  
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
594 
For internal use of IA&AD  5. IMPORTANTRISK PARAMETERS  
The prime activity of RLDA  is leasing  of vacant Railway  Land  for commercial  
use for the purpose of generating revenue by non -tariff measures . 
The risk  analysis  should be done on following parameters   
I) Quantum  of non -tariff earnings . 
II) Number of Tender  cases/ Contract  cases both for consultancy  and leasing  
of railway  land and other miscellaneous  cases.  
III) Result  of last Audit . 
IV) Audit  perception based on delay viz. awarding of consultancy  
contract /Lease  contract  with reference to entrustment  of land . 
V) Audit  perception based on News paper  publications, Complain ts lodged 
etc.  
6. IT APPLICATIONS USED IN RLDA  
I) Saral Pay  Package software  is used for preparation of salary of the 
officials.  
II) GENIUS  software  is used for e-filing of TDS /GST . 
III) CMS : Claim Management  System  is used to settle the claim cases.  
7. AUDIT OF RLDA   
Audit  of RLDA  is divided in the following two stages:  
Financial  Attest  Audit  and 
Compliance   Audit  
7.1 Financial  Attest  Audit  
Format  of Account : Before commencing the Financial  Attest  Audit , it should be 
seen that Accounts  have been prepared in the prescribed  uniform  format  of Accounts.  
The Annual  Financial  Statements of Central  Autonomous  Bodies  (ABs) comprise the 
following statements, prepared and presented in the formats and the manner as 
provided in the Uniform  Format  of Accounts : 
I) Balance  Sheet ; 
II) Income  and Expenditure  Statement ;  
III) Statement of Receipts  and Payments;  
IV) Schedules  to Financial  Statements;  
V) Instructions  and Accounting Principles ; 
VI) Notes  and Instructions  for the Schedules ; and  
VII) “Statement of GPF and NPS  Accounts ” prescribed  in the format of 
accounts . 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
595 
For internal use of IA&AD  General  Checklist for certification  of accounts  of Central  Autonomous  
Bodies  
General  Points  
I) Whether the accounts  have been approved  by the competent  authority ? 
II) Whether the certificate  for physical  verification  of cash  was obtained?  
III) Whether confirmation of Bank  Balances  /Fixed  Deposits  from the 
respective Banks  taken by AB/Internal  Auditor ? 
IV) Whether confirmation of Debtors /Loans and Advances  from respective 
parties was taken?  
V) Whether significant Accounting Policies are formed in compliance  of 
Accounting Standards  (AS -1), specifically regarding basis of preparation 
of accounts  such as accrual  basis, revenue recognition, valuation  of 
investment , Fixed Assets , Depreciation  on fixed  Assets, Accounting of 
Grants , Retirement  benefits and application  of accounting standards .? 
VI) Whether bank  reconciliation  statement is being prepared regularly? If 
there are very old cases appearing in the bank  reconciliation, then the 
same needs to be properly investigated.  
VII) Whether contingent  losses have been accounted for as per the requirement 
of AS  4?  The amount of a contingent  loss should be provided for by a 
charge in the statement of Income  & Expenditure  Account  if it is probable 
that future events will confirm that an asset  has been impaired or a liability  
has been incurred as at the balance  sheet date and a reasonable estimate  
of the amount of the resulting loss  can be made.  
VIII) The existence of a contingent  loss should be disclosed in the financial  
statements if either of the conditions in preceding par agraph  is not met.  
IX) Assets  and liabilities  should be adjusted for events occurring after the 
balance  sheet date that provide additional  evidence to assist the estimation  
of amounts relating to conditions existing at the balance  sheet date.  
X) Whether there is change in rate /accounting policy  on depreciation . If so, 
the same needs to be disclosed and quantified ? 
XI) Whether autonomous  body has drawn its accounts  in the uniform  format 
of accounts ? 
XII) Whether adequate internal  audit  system  is there consideri ng the size and 
nature of business of AB? If the internal  audit has been entrusted  to 
Chartered Accountant firm, their terms and conditions of appointment , 
scope  of work  and consultancy  fee be examined.  
XIII) Internal  control  is the process by which management  structures  an 
organization  to provide assurance that an entity operates effectively and 
efficiently, has a reliable financial  reporting system  and complies with 
applicable laws  and regulations . Main purpose of effective internal  
control  is safeguarding assets , ensuring financial  statement reliability, 
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
596 
For internal use of IA&AD  promoting operational  efficiency , and encouraging compliance  with 
Management ’s directives. It should be seen that proper internal  control  
system  exists so as to achieve the aforesaid objectives . 
XIV)  Whether number of meeting of different committee s were he ld as per the 
manual  provisions. Deficiencies , if any , may be suitably pointed out?  
XV) Whether the AB has its Accounting Manual ? 
XVI)  Whether Cash  Book is being maintained in prescribed  form?  
XVII)  Whether In ternal  Control  safeguards are put in place by Management  of 
an organization  to provide assurance that its activities are proceeding as 
planned?  
XVIII)  Whether there is laid  down  procedure for the appointment  of consultant 
on contract ? 
XIX)  Whether every transaction is supported by an authentic voucher  and 
vouchers  are serially numbered?  
BALANCE SHEET  
Fixed  Assets  
I) Whether all additions to assets  with account  heads have been carried out 
with proper approvals  and no inadmissible expenditure  has been 
capitalized?  
II) Whether th e assets  sold or disposed off during the year and the capital  
gain /loss  thereof have been accounted for?  
III) List of all works -in-progress as on 31st March with details of expenditure  
booked during current  financial  year should be checked. Whether all 
completed items have been removed from the work  in progress and 
debited  to concerned assets  account ? 
IV) Existence of proper record relating to ownership of land   
V) Material  items retired  from active use and held for disposal  should be 
stated at their net book value  or net realizable value whichever is less and 
shown separately in the financial  statements.  
Investments  
I) The value of investment  as depicted in investment  register  should tally 
with the value of investment  depicted in Balance  Sheet . The discrepancy 
should be thoroughly checked and commented upon.  
II) Investments  classified  as short term investments should be carried in the 
financial  statements at the lower of cost  and fair value determined either 
on an individual investment  basis or by category of investment , but not 
on an overall basis.  
III) Investment  classified  as long term investments should be carried in the 
financial  statements at cost . However, provision for diminution shall be 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
597 
For internal use of IA&AD  made to recognize a decline, other than temporary, in the value of the 
investments.  
Cash  and Bank  Balances   
I) Whether the fixed  deposits register  tallies with certificates/confirmat ion 
issued by the bank ? 
II) The figures of certificate  of physical  verification  of cash  in hand  should 
be tallied with the figures depicted in Balance  Sheet . 
Debtors   
I) Whether categorization is made for debtors where outstanding   is more 
than 6 months and otherwise?  
II) Whether adequate provision for bad and doubtful  debt has been made?  
Current  Liabilities  
I) Whether provisions for retirement  benefits had been made in the accounts  
on actuarial basis?  Non  provision/ under provision of retirement  benefits  
should be suitably commented upon?  
II) Whether suitable provision for salary/allowances  for the month  of March 
has been made or not? It should be seen that AB have made provision for 
these expenses  during prev ious year also. If no opening provision have 
been made the same may be commented.  
III) Whether liability  for unspent grant  has been provided? The advances  on 
capital  accounts  should not be treated as utilization of grant and should be 
shown as unutilized grant.  
IV) Whether the assumptions made by the actuary were realistic and based on 
current  trends?  
INCOME & EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT  
Income  
I) Whether grant  in aid has been properly segregated and only grant for 
revenue pur pose is  recognized  as income  in Income  & E xpenditure  
Account ? 
II) The grant  for capi tal expenditure  should be routed through Balance  Sheet .  
III) Grants  received before 31st March but the cheques  received  their against  
in April or next fina ncial  year should be taken i n the accounts  and equal 
amount  should be shown as recoverable  from the grantor.  
IV) Whether loss /profit  on sale of fixed  assets  has been properly accounted 
for? 
V) Whether all items of income  such as rent  for quarters , office premises, 
shops , banks and post  offices, electricity charges  due but not 
received/recovered have been accounted for?  
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
598 
For internal use of IA&AD  Expenditure   
I) Whether the accrued expenditure  for salary/rent /electricity bill etc has 
been booked for 12 months ending March?  
II) Whether Prepaid  expenses  against Insurance  Premium, Annual  
maintenance  contracts  and any other item of expenditure  where the 
benefits spills over to the ne xt financial  year and the periods covered  by 
such payments have been accounted for properly?  
RECEIPT S AND PAYMENT S ACCOUNT  
I) It should be ensured that only actual cash  transactions should be depicted 
in R eceipt  &Payment  Account  as it is observed that sometime R&P 
Account included receivable/payable amounts.  
II) It should be seen that closing balance  of cash /bank  balances of Receipt  
and Payment Accounts  tally with the closing balance  of cash /bank  
balances as appearing in the Balance Sheet . 
System  of Physical  verificati on of fixed  assets : 
I) Whether fixed  assets  have been physically verified by the Management  at 
the end of the year?  Whether any material  deficie ncies  were noticed on 
physical  verification  and if so, the same have been properly dealt with in 
the books  of accounts ? 
II) Whether fixed  assets  register  had been maintained in the proper format?  
III) In case no physical  verification  has been conducted, the period from 
which it has not been done may also be bro ught out to show the gravity.  
Syste m of Physical  verification  of inventory : 
I) Whether the physical  verification  of inventory  has been carried out by the 
Management  at reasonable intervals ? 
II) Whether the item wise, highest and lowest levels of consumable  stack 
have been fixed  and maintained?  Whether the valuation  of inventory  done 
as per accepted norms  of ICAI . 
III) Whether inventories were issued based on proper authentication?  
Regularity  in payment of statutory  dues :   
Whether the AB is regular in depositing undisputed  statutory  dues including 
Provident  Fund , Employees ’ State  Insurance , Income  Tax, GST ( Sales  Tax, 
Service  Tax), Custom  Duty  and any other statutory dues with the appropriate  
authorities ? If not, indicate the extent of the statutory dues at the close of  financial  
year outstanding  for more than six months from the date they became payable.  
7.2 Compliance  Audit  
Compliance  audit  is based on revenue generatio n by way of commercial  
utilisation of railway  land entrusted  to RLDA  by Railway  Board . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
599 
For internal use of IA&AD  Procedure  for entrustment  of Land  by Railway  Board  to RLDA :  
Sites for commercial  development  will be identified by the Zonal  Railways  and 
advised to Railway  Board  with GM 's approv al (At the time  of identification  for 
entrustment  of land , the Zonal Railway shall ensure that it is in full possession of 
unimpaired  title of land  and land title records, plans  etc., and that requisite mutation 
exists in Revenue /Municipal  records in f avour of the Railways). Railway Board  
will entrust the Railway Land for commercial  development  to RLDA . RLDA may 
also suggest sites to the Zonal Railways for this purpose. It may not be poss ible at 
the time  of entrustment of land to specifically and clearly demarcate the precise 
boundaries of the land to be used for commercial  development since the s ame 
would depend upon market feasibility  study t o be carried out by the RLDA. The 
exact land area/boundaries would be finalized based on the modalities indicated as 
under:  
I) After the entrustment  of land  by R ailway  Board , RLDA  shall conduct a 
feasibility  study with regard to the potential of commercial  development , i.e., 
it will carry out necessary market survey  to assess the potentiality  for 
development  of land  and work  out the best model of commercial  development 
in terms of best possible revenue returns . RLDA would correspond with Zonal  
Railway w.r.t . all issues pertaining to the land including removal of 
encroachments , modification  in area etc, as required.  
II) On the basi s of market feasibility  report, RLDA  shall in consultation with 
Zonal  Railways , finalize the exact area of land  along with boundaries etc. that 
will be taken up for commercial  development . The exact area of t he Railwa y 
Land to be used for commercial  development  shall be mentioned in a joint 
"Handing  over Note".  
III) In case the entrustment  letter to RLDA  does no t indicate the land  area, the 
site/ area shall be finalized by RLDA in consultation with GM /Zonal  
Railways . In case the land  area has been indicated in the entrustment letter, 
variation i n area of land can be finalized by RLDA in consultation with the 
Zonal Railways and with the approval  of GM/Zonal Railways as a part of 
such entrustment.  
Audit  of Consultancy  Contractor (Financial  Valuation/Architectural ): RLDA  
conduct feasibility  study with regard to the potential of commercial  development  of 
land and if it is found  that projected earning of land  is more than Rs.10 crore  than 
RLDA appoint consultancy  contractor for second and best opinion . 
The Financial  Consultant  prepares the fina ncial  model, determining lease period, 
analysing and suggesting project model, determining reserve price, marketing  of the 
project, preparation of Tender /Bid document and assisting RLDA  in Bid process and 
updating of valuation  in case there is a long gap  between the original valuation  and 
the bidding  time due to any reason.  
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
600 
For internal use of IA&AD  Architectural  consultant are required to collect data, do site appraisal  and examine 
scope  stated in Request for Proposal (RFP ), prepare Architectural Plans/Layout 
Plan/Master  Plan for the purpos e of obtaining NOC /change of land  use (CLU) etc.  
Audit  of Tender  for appointing consultancy  contractor  
It should be checked that:  
I) proper arrangements exist for giving due publicity f or tenders  invited and 
the response is quite good. Further, before acceptance of the tendered 
rates, whether their reasonableness and competitiveness was established , 
II) a consultant engaged by the employer has to have cert ain degree of 
accountability on its part for any advice or service  rendered to the 
employer. To ensure adequate accountability,  suitable terms and 
conditions for apportioning accountability between the employers and 
consultant exists,  
III) there  is no undue  delay in finalisation of tenders  and communication  of 
its acceptance to the tenderer,  
IV) the reasons for not accepting the lowest tender  have been recorded,  
V) the appointment  of consultants was done in a transparent  manner after 
following the competitive tendering  system , 
VI) role of consultants  is well -defined,  
Audit  of Contract  
It sh ould be checked that:  
I) The terms of the contract  are precise and definite leaving no room for 
ambiguity,  
II) Contract  is signed by an authority  who is competent  to enter into contracts  
and simultaneously signed by the contractor or his authorised agent,  
III) The security  deposit  in the appropriate  form and of correct amount has 
been lodged  within the period stipulated in the con tract, 
IV) Time schedule  for execution  of the work  as defined in the tender , e.g. 
preparation of valuation  report, preparation of Request for Proposal (RFP ) 
etc. was followed by the contractor,  
V) Penal  clauses for deficiency in service  should invariably be stipulated in 
the contracts /MOUs  with the consultants.  
VI) There is no ambiguity in the conditi ons of the contract . 
Audit  of Contract  for leasing  of land : 
Procedure  for entrustment  of land  to RLDA  has been desc ribed in para  
no. 2 -Transaction Audit .  After finalization of all activities related with 
Financial /Architectural  Consultancy  and if found that sites are viable for 
commercial  development  then RLDA advertise the RFP  for leasing  out of 
commercial  land through transparent  bidding  process. The bidding p rocess for 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
601 
For internal use of IA&AD  the selection of a suitable Developer should be done on the basis of 2 (two) packet 
system  i.e. by submission of Technical  and Financial bids separately. The 
successful bidder  should be technically  eligible and offer given by him should 
have highest upfront lease premium and subsequent annual  lease rent .  
Audit  of Tender  for leasing  of land  
While conducting audit  of tender  for leasing  of land , it should be seen that:  
I) proper arrangements exist for giving due publicity for tenders  invited and 
the response is quite good, before acceptance of the tendered rates, their 
reasonableness and competitiveness have been established , 
II) there is no undue  delay in finalisation of tenders  and communication  of 
its acceptance to the tenderer,  
III) the reasons for not accepting the highest bidding  have been recorded,  
IV) the appointment  of bidder  has been  done in a transparent  manner and after 
following the competitive tendering  system , 
V) role of bidders is well-defined.  
Audit  of Contract  
It should be  checked that:  
I) The terms of the contract  are precise and definite leaving no room for 
ambiguity,  
II) Contract  is signed by an authority  who is competent  to enter into contracts  
and simultaneously signed by the contractor or his authorised agent,  
III) The security  deposit  in the appropriate  form and of correct amount has 
been lodged within the period stipulated in the contract , 
IV) Bidder  has deposited the lease amount and other dues well in time  as per 
the ten der condition,  
V) All formalities as mentioned in the para no. 26 of Land  Development  
Hand Book Part -I(LDHB ) (Regulations  for bids and lease 
agreement)were carried  out before executing the agreement,  
VI) Time schedule  for execution  of the work  as defined in the tender  [Land  
Development  Hand Book Part -III(Instructions  to Bidder )] has been 
followed by the bidder , 
VII) Penal  clauses for deficiency in service  should invariably be stipulated in 
the contracts /MOUs  with the consu ltants.  
ESTABLISHMENT AUDIT  
Sanctions  
I) All sanctions  and orders involving financial  considerations are endorsed 
by the Finance  Department , wherever necessary,  
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
602 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Sanctions  are issued under the signature  of the officers concerned in ink  
and not over cyclostyled  signatures , 
III) Sanctions  are financially justified duly satisfyi ng the Standards  (canons) 
of financial  propriety , 
IV) The sanctioning authority  is competent  to do so as per the Schedule  of 
Powers (SOP ). 
Audit of pay  bills-  
I) There is proper sanction to the post  held by the employee,  
II) The employee is entitled to the amount paid to him,  
III) Allowances  are given as per the RLDA ’s ru les and regulations  issued 
from time  to time , 
IV) Deductions for P.F. subscriptions are in accordance with the provisions 
of the Provident  Fund  rules  and t he deductions are traced into the recovery 
sheets , 
V) Deductions of NPS  subscription  is in accordance with the provision,  
VI) The amount has been correctly acknowledged by the employee.  
Travelling  Allowance  Bills  
I) Travel by air , if any, is covered  by the rules  or special  sanction thereof , 
II) whether officers who countersign their own bills  do not abu se this 
Privilege and use due diligence,  
III) Whether a change of Headquarters  in certain instances would not result in 
a reduction of travelling  allowance,  
IV) Whether arrangements exist to deface travelling  allowance journals  
accompanying travelling allowance bills  in a proper manner to prevent 
them from being passed a second time  for payment.   
Registers of foreign  service  contrib ution  
This register  should be checked to see that correct recoveries  are being made 
towards leave  salary, pensions, provident  fund contributions , gratuity etc.  
Passes  and P.T.O  
It should be checked that Passes  and PTOs were issued according to the 
instructions  mentioned in the Railway  Servant Pass  Rule  – 1986  and instructions  
issued from the Railway Board ’s from time  to time . 
Contingent  vouchers  
The general instructions  issued by RLDA  in respect of contingent  vouchers  
should keep  in mind. In the audit  of contingent  vouchers  it should be seen, inter -
alia, that: - 
I) voucher  has received such sanction as is necessary;  
II) expenditure  has been incurred by an officer competent  to incur it;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
603 
For internal use of IA&AD  III) no canon  of financial  propriety  is infringed;  
IV) the bill is in proper form;  
V) the amount in words and figures agree;  
VI) the rates are apparently not extravagant;  
VII) bills containing charges  for miscellaneous  supplies bear a certificate  that 
the articles  have been received in good condition and entered in the stock  
account . 
Leave  account  
During the check ing of leave  account , following points are to be checked:  
I) Leaves are granted as per the leave  rules .   
II) Leave salary charged on the basis of the statement regard ing calculation 
of average  pay, absentee statement, memorandum of differences etc.  
Note :    In addition  to the coverage of the issues mentioned above during Financial  
Attest  Audit  and Transaction Audit,  the manual  provisions contained in various 
auditing  guidelines /guidance  notes  such as  Financial Attest Auditing  Guidelines , 
CAG’s Rules  and Regulations , 2020  etc. may also be complied with, according 
to the m ode of Audit being undertaken. Compliance  of CAG’s Auditing 
Standards , 2017  is mandatory and failure  to observe the a udit standards  will render the 
Auditor  answerable for such failure . 
 
  
Chapter 18 –Rail Land Development Authority  
 
604 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
605 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 1 9 - WORKING OF  RAILWAY SPORTS PROMOTION 
BOARD  
1. INTRODUCTION  
In pursuant to Section  26 of the Indian  Companies Act , VII of 1913, Indian 
Railways  Athletic  Association  established  in 1928 to organize and control  sports 
and athletics on Indian Railways  was further registered as Company  with limited 
liability  without the addition of the word “Limited ” to it s name vide letter dated 
12th April 1943 issued by the Chief  Commissioner , Delhi  Province.  As per 
Companies Act, 1956 , the Company got place under Section 25 of the Act and 
the name was changed to “Railway  Sports  Control  Board ” (RSCB) in 1956 and 
subsequently to “Railway Sports Promotion  Board” (R SPB) in 1998 so as to bring 
the nomenclature in tune with the functions  of the Board.   
2. ORGANISATIONAL HIERARCHY  
Executive  Committee  of the RSPB  comprises:  
I) President  (Member  Staff , Railway  Board ) 
II) Vice President  (among the rank of Senior  Officers of Railway  Board ) 
III) Treasurer  
IV) Secretary  
V) Joint  Secretary  
3. ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE RSPB  
3.1 At Ministry /Board  Level  
The object of RSPB  is to organize, promote and develop all recognized  sports 
and games and such other games as decided by the Board .  RSPB works  for the  
promotion  and development  of athletics on Indian  Railways .  It formulates plan 
and issue  policies regarding conducting games in line  with BCCI  or 
Associations/Federations. RSPB approves conducting any natio nal and All India  
Inter Railway  & other open tournament and exhibition matches in any games on 
Indian Railway. It makes policy  to provide coaching  and training  facilities in 
various games to sports persons on Indian Railways  to improve their standard & 
performances in national and international  tournament s.  RSPB provides financial  
assistance to organize games and sports in frastructure  grant  is given to develop 
stadium, courts  & grounds etc. besides procuring of fitness and other equipment  
for the Railway players.  RSPB plays role in development  of sports at national 
and international level on Indian Railway.  
Chapter 19 – Working of Railway Sports Promotion Board  
 
606 
For internal use of IA&AD  3.2 Zonal  Railways /production  units /other organization s level  
An annual  President  Secretary  Meeting  (PSM) is held in the beginning of the 
financial  year i.e. in the month  of April/May to decide the games/sports activities 
being organized during the financi al year at RSPB  level.  Thereafter, concerned 
zonal railways/production  units  will have to submit their details along with 
estimated expenditure  on concerned sports/games p roposed to be organized. 
After scrutiny of estimates , the financial  grants are sanctioned  by the RSPB to the 
concerned zonal railway /production units/other organization s etc.  After 
completion  of game, the details of expenditure  incurred are sent to RSPB by the 
concerned zonal railway /production unit s. 
There are various sports associations in zonal railways.  Au dit of zonal railway  
sports associations is conducted by different zonal railway  audit  offices.  
Apex , Audit  and Implementing  Units  
Being an apex body , RSPB  maintains its accounts  as per provisions of Companies 
Act.  Hence, RSPB itself is an Apex , Audit  and Implementing  unit. 
4. LIST OF  ACT IVITIES  
The main functions  of the RSPB  are as under:  
I) correspondence with Railway  Board  in connection with Demands  for  
budget /grant  from the R ailway Board  
II) to give financial  assistance to various affiliated associations to  meet the 
requirement to organize inter divisional /zonal level sports tournaments,  
III) providing infrastructure  grant /assistance to associated zonal 
railway /production  units sports associations, for development  of sports 
infrastructure , 
IV) to make arrangement  for tour, visa, transport  etc. for athletics’ and tour 
management  for various international  sports tournaments,  
V) procurement  of sports material /kit for various sports activities as well as 
for athletics; and  
VI) Settlement  of bills /claims of players and tour management . 
5. IMPORTANT RISK  PARAMETERS WITH RESPECT TO THE 
ACTIVITIES  
Previous Balance  Sheet , Income  & Expenditure  Accounts  and Audit  
Reports : The auditor should ensure that the accounts  of the entity have been  
approved  by the competent  authority . The auditor should inspect aforesaid 
documents  in order to confirm that the balances therein are correctly carried 
forward in the new  books . Perusal of the last Audit Report  may give some 
important information useful to the auditor in his work  of audit . He should also 
see whether the assurance given by the Management  in the past has been taken 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
607 
For internal use of IA&AD  care of now.  The previous Audit Reports  help the auditor in understanding the 
working of the Company . 
System  of Internal  Check :  
I) The auditor should  obtain a written statement from a responsible officer 
regarding the system  of internal  check, internal  audit  and the system  of 
accountancy adopted by the Company . 
II) He should also obtain a list of the officers of the Company  and the jobs  
assigned to them. This information shall help him in the quick disposal  of 
queries. In case of any doubt of a transaction, the concerne d officer may 
be contacted for getting the necessary information.  
The auditor should satisfy as to:  
a) whether, in his opinion  and to the best of his information and 
according to the explanation given to him, the accounts  give the 
information required by the Act  and give a true and fair vie w of the 
state of the C ompany 's affairs in the case of the balance  Sheet  as at 
the end of the financial  year and i n the case of the Income  & 
Expenditure  Account  for the financial  year.  
b) whether, he has obtained all the information and explanations which 
to the best of his knowledge  and belief were necessary for the purpose 
of his audit . 
c) whether, in his opinion , proper books  of account , as required by law  
have been kept by the Company  so far as appe ar from the examination 
of those books  and proper returns  adequate for the purpose of his audit  
have been received from branches, if any, not visited by him.  
d) whether, the Company 's balance  sheet and income  and expenditure  
account  dealt with by the Report  are in accordance with the books  of 
account  and returns . 
Further, the  following checks  should also be exercised during the course of 
audit  to see:  
I) whether, the budget /grant  received from the Railway  Board  is spent on 
the purpose for which it has been granted ? 
II) whether, the Company  have an appropriate  internal  financial  control  
system  for disbursement  of financi al assistance and grant ? 
III) whether, the Company  has appropriate  internal  financial  control  system  
for giving advance payment  to the team member for tournament to be 
spent under  different heads of expenditure ? 
IV) whether, there is a transparent  system  of tendering  or quotations for 
purchase  of material /sports kits that are to be used in tournament ? 
 
Chapter 19 – Working of Railway Sports Promotion Board  
 
608 
For internal use of IA&AD  It should also be verified from the records and systems that there should be:  
I) proper control  over the grant  given to the other associations with regard s 
to its usages;  
II) adequate control  over the payment made as advances , 
III) sufficient control  over air  fare claims with the proof of travelling  like 
boarding passes  etc. in place,  
IV) control  over coaches  for distribution  of kits among the members; and  
V) proper maintenance  of  vouchers  and records.  
Further, as per Para  2.5.17 of Chapter -5 of C&AG ’s Manual  of Standing  Orders 
(Audit ), it should be specifically examined in the course of audit  of Government  
companies  whether:  
I) the provisions of the Companies Act , 1956  or the relevant statutes 
governing the Company  concerned have been complied with;  
II) there has been any material  deviation from the objectives  listed in the 
Company ’s Memorandum  of Association  and Articles  of Association;  
III) instructions  of the Government  of India , State  government, Reserve  Bank  
of India, etc. have been followed in conducting financial  transaction;  
IV) pronouncements of the Institute  of Charted  Accountants of India  (ICAI ) 
relating to Accounting Standards  (which are mandatory) and standard 
auditing  practices have been complied with, and its guidance  notes  and 
opinions in regard to accrual  accounti ng, reserves created during 
revaluation of fixed  assets , expenditure  incurred during construction , 
treatment of excise duty , debtors, loans  and advances , investments, etc. 
have been adhered to;  
V) accounting procedures for proper control  over expenditure  and realization 
of revenues are adequate;  
VI) there is any large accumulation of surplus  stores /finished stock ; 
VII) the method of charging depreciation  on the assets  is reasonable;  
VIII) bad and doubtful  debts have outstanding  for long periods and, if so, the 
reasons therefore;  
IX) major  contract  agreements have been concluded in the Company ’s best 
interests and their terms and conditions have been enforced, and  
X) internal  control  mechanism s that assist the Management  in safeguarding 
assets  and resources  and in complying with laws  and regulations , and 
provide assurance about the accuracy  and completeness of accounting 
records, are available and operate as desirable.  
6. LIST OF ITEMS TO BE CHECKED DURING AUDIT:  
I) Budget /Grant  received from the Ministry  of Railways  (Railway  Board ) 
II) Journal  Book  
III) Ledgers  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
609 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Cash  Book  
V) Receipt  & Payment Account  
VI) Trial  Balance /Balance  Sheet  
VII) Journal  vouchers  especially for the month  of March and April of the 
respective year  
VIII) Tender  system  for procurement  of sports material , if any.  
IX) Financial  assistance , if any, received from different federations i.e. 
Hockey,   Football et c. 
X) Disbursement of budget /grant  to various railway  sports associations, 
Production  Unit/Workshop  sports association affiliated to RSPB . 
XI) Bank  reconciliation  statement  
XII) Fixed  Assets  Register  
XIII) Memorandum  of Association  and Articles  of Association  
Note: RSPB  has assigned a work  to a software  company to develop software  
for the computerization  of its accounts .  The same is under process  
 
 
  
Chapter 19 – Working of Railway Sports Promotion Board  
 
610 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
611 
For internal use of IA&AD  CHAPTER 20- RAIL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING s 
AUDIT OF COMPANIES UNDER THE ADMINISTR ATIVE 
CONTROL OF MINISTRY OF RAILWAY  
1.  INTRODUCTION   
 The office of Principal  Director  of Audit  (PDA )/Director General  of 
Audit(DGA ), Railway  Commerc ial(RC) was initially formed in May 2012 as a 
result of restructuring in 2012. There were two wings viz Railway Audit Wing 
and Commercial Audit Wing. The Railway Audit wing consisted of Central  
Organisation  for Modernisation of workshops  (COFMOW ), New  Delhi , Diesel  
Loco  Modernisation Workshop  (DMW ), Patiala and Rail  Coach  Factory  (RCF ), 
Kapurthala. The audit  of 17 companies  was entrusted  to Commercial Audit  Wing 
which has now increased to 37 .  
 The Offic e of C& AG, New  Delhi  vide Office Order dated 07.04.2017 separated 
non commercial  audited  entities from the office of the PDA /DGA (RC). Vide the 
above letter the non -commercial  audited  entities namely COFMOW , New Delhi, 
DMW  Patiala and RCF  Kapurthala were transferred to DGA (NR). At present , 
the office of the PDA/DGA, Railway  Commercial  (RC) is situated at 4 DDU 
Marg, New Delhi.  
2. AUDIT JURISDICTION  
 The office of the PDA /DGA (RC)is having 37  companies  (including one defunct 
company*) under its audit  jurisdiction  as detailed below: - 
Sl.  Name of the Company  
1 Container  Corporation  of India  Limited  (CONCOR )  
2 IRCON  International Limited  
3 RITES  Limited  
4 Indian  Railway  Catering  & Tourism  Corporation  Limited  (IRCTC ) 
5 Rail Vikas  Nigam  Limited  
6 Dedicated  Freight  Corridor Corporation  Limited  
7 Rail Tel Corporation  of India  Limited  (RCIL ) 
8 Indian  Railway  Finance  Corporation  Limited  (IRFC ) 
9 SIDCUL CONCOR  Infra Company  Ltd 
10 CONCOR  AIR LIMITED  
11 Fresh  and Healthy Enterprises  Limited  
12 Punjab Logistics Infrastructure  Limited  (PLIL ) 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
612 
For internal use of IA&AD  13 IRCON  Infrastructure  Services  Limited  
14 IRCON  Davangere Haveri Highway  Ltd (IDHHL )  
15 Indian  Railway  Station s Development  Corporation  Limited  (IRSDCL ) 
16 Railway  Energy  Management  Company  Limited  (REMCL ) 
17 SAIL RITES  Bengal Wagon  Industries  Limited  (SRWBIL ) 
18 National  High  Speed  Rail Corporation  Ltd (NHRCCL ) 
19 Bharuch  Dahej Rail  Company  Limited  (BDRCL ) 
20 Kutch Railway  Company  Limited  
21 Pipavav  Railway  Corporation  Limited  
22 Krishnapatnam  Rail Company  Limited  
23 Haridaspur  Paradip Railway  Company  Limited , Bhubaneswar . 
24 IRCON  PB Tollway Ltd.  
25 IRCON  Shivpuri  Guna Tollway Limited . 
26 IRCON  Vadodara -Kim Expressway  
27 Surat Integrated  Transportation  Development  Corporation  Ltd. 
28 Railtel  Enterprises  Limited  
29 NRTU  Foundation  
30 High  Speed  Rail Corridor Corporation  Limited  
31 IRCON Gurgaon Rewari Highway Limited  
32 IRCON Haridwar Bypass Limited  
33 IRCON Akloli -Shirsad Expressway Limited  
34 IRCON Ludhiana Rupnagar Highway Limited  
35 IRCON Bhoj Morbe Expressway Limited  
36 IRCON Renewable Power Limited  
37 83Wagon  India  Limited  
3. BRIEF OF ACTIVITIES OF COMPANIES   
 The Company  specific brief and activities performed by each Company under the 
audit  jurisdiction  of this office has been given in detail in Annexure – I. 
                                                           
83 Defunct/Under liquidation  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
613 
For internal use of IA&AD  4. CHECK LIST FOR COMPLIANCE AUDIT  
 The Company  specific issues to be examined during the Compliance  Audit  of 
these companies  have been specified in Annexure – II. 
5. FINANCIAL ATTEST  AUDIT OF COMPANIE S 
 Section  129 of Companies Act  2013 , provides for preparation of Financial  
Statements. Schedule  III to the Companies Act, 2013 (‘the Act’) was notified 
along with the Act itself on 29 August, 2013 thereby providing the manner in 
which every Company  registered under the Act shall prepare its Financial 
Statements. Financial Statements as defined under the Act include Balance  Sheet, 
Statement of Changes in Equity for the period, Statement of Profit  and Loss for 
the period and the Notes . 
 Ministry  of Corporate  Affairs (‘MCA’) notified Indian  Accounting Standards  
(‘Ind AS ’) on February 16, 2015. Further, MCA notified amendments to Schedule  
III to the Act  on 6th April 2016  whereby:  
 In the existing Schedule  III, the heading “General  Instructions for 
preparation of Balance Sheet and Statement of Profit and Loss of a 
company” was substituted as  
“Division  I 
Financial statement for a company whose Financial  Statements are 
required to comply with the Companies (Accounting Standards ) Rules , 
2006 .  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF 
BALANCE SHEET AND STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS 
OF A COMPANY”  
 At the  end of  Schedule III the following was inserted  
“Division  II 
Financial  Statements for a company whose Financial Statements are 
drawn up in compliance of the Companies (Indian  Accounting Standards ) 
Rules , 2015 . 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF A COMPANY REQUIRED TO 
COMPLY WITH Ind AS”  
Formats of Financial  Statements for companies  were also given in 
Division II.  
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
614 
For internal use of IA&AD  5.1 Audit  of Financial  Statements of Government  Companies  
 The statutory  auditors appointed by the CAG  under Section  139 of the Companies 
Act, 2013, conduct audit  of accounts  of the government companies  and submit 
their report thereon in accordance with Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2013.  
The CAG p lays an oversight role by monitoring  the performance  of the statutory 
auditors with the overall objective  that the statutory auditors discharge the 
functions  assigned to them proper ly and effectively. This function is discharged 
by exercising the power  
I) to issue  directions to the statutory  auditors under Section  143 (5) of the 
Companies Act , 2013 , and  
II) to supplement  or comment upon the statutory  auditor's report under 
Section  143 (6) of the  Companies Act , 2013 . 
5.2 Supplementary  Audit  of Financial  Statements  
 The office of PDA /DGA (RC) conducts supplementary audit  under Section  143 
(6) of the  Companies Act , 2013 of financial  statements of the Companies under 
audit jurisdiction  of this office.  
 While conducting the supplementary audit  of financial  statements the  audit 
party should follow the following broad  guidelines : 
I) The major  heads of Balance  Sheet , Statement of Profit  and Loss and Cash  
Flow Stateme nts should be selected at the time  of desk review and needs 
to be approved  by the Group  Officer before commencement  of Audit . 
II) The major  heads may be selected based on the following par ameters : 
a) Change in the Company ’s line  of service /product during the financial  
year.  
b) Change in law /statute impacting the working of the Company . 
c) Any change in accounting policy  of the Company  impactin g the 
financial  results of the C ompany.  
d) Changes in accounting standards  impacting the financial  statements 
of the Comp any. 
e) Major  capitalisation done by the Company  during the year  
III) The major  heads of the accounts  as selected above would be examined in 
detail by following Top to Down  approach. Top to Down approach means 
the account  head  would be examined in detail starting from Balance  
Sheet /Statement of Profit  and Loss to Voucher level, if required.  
 Suppose, if sele ct the head  ‘Capital  work  in progress’(CWIP ) under 
Property Plant  and Equipment  in Balance  Sheet , then following steps may 
be follo wed for Top to Down approach:  
a) Obtain project wise details of CWI P. 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
615 
For internal use of IA&AD  b) After getting project wise details , head  wise expenditure details of the 
selected project may be asked for.  
c) The detailed head  wise expenditu re submitted by the Company  may 
be examined in detail to check whether the expenditure  booked 
directly pertains to construction  of project or not? If it directly pertains 
to the p roject it can be capitalised and if not directly pertains to the 
project it should be charged to revenue.  
d) For judging the nature of expenditure , the relevant vouchers may be 
asked for  and examine the  supporting papers  attached with the 
voucher  and if required, the relevant file  may also be called for to 
examine the issue  in detail.  
e) Further, the revenue earned during construction  of the  project and 
directly related to the construction  of the project should be credited  to 
the cost  of the  project. Examples of such revenue may be: sale of 
tender  documents , int erest  on mobilisation advance given to 
contractor, interest  earned on temporary investment  of debt/ loan 
amount etc.   
(The steps mentioned above are just for reference , the audit  party may  apply 
its own judgement while examining the issue .) 
IV) The Accounting Standards  applicable to the Financial  Statements of the 
Company  should be identified and its compliance  by the Company should 
be checked.  
V) Necessary disclosure required under Accounting Standards  should be 
made by the Company  and the same would also be examined in audit . In 
this regard guidance  note on Ind AS  – Disclosure  check list issued by the 
ICAI  may be referred.  
VI) The compliance  to the comments  of C&AG  issued on the Financial  
State ment of the Company  for the previous years should also be 
examined.  
VII) The compliance  to the assurance given by the Company  on the Audit  
observations on the Financial  Statement s of previous year should also be 
examined.  
VIII) It is also to be examined whether the Independent Auditor  has complied 
with the directi ons/ sub -directions issued by the C&AG  of India / 
PDA /DGA (RC).  The directions under section  143(5) of the Companies 
Act 2013 have be en revised and the revised directions are applicable from 
the financial  year 2018 -19. A copy of the same has also been enclosed 
with th ese guidelines  as Annexure – III. 
 
 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
616 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure – I 
Specific Brief & the Activities  of the Companies  
1. Container  Corporation  of India  Limited  (CONCOR ) 
 Brief: - CONCOR  was inc orporated in March, 1988 under the Companies Act , 
and began its operation  in November, 1989 by taking over seven Inland Container  
Depots (ICD s) from the In dian Railways .  CONCOR has attained the status of 
“Nav-Ratna ” during 2013 . The affairs of the Company  are managed by Board  of 
Directors  which comprises Chai rman  cum Managing Director , Director  
(Finance ), Director (Domestic ), Director (Project  and Services ), and Director 
(International Marketing  & Operations ). 
 Activities :- 
I) To carry out the business of multimodal transport  operators, general 
carrier of international  and domestic cargo within India  and abroad by all 
modes . 
II) To set up and manage consolidation and cargo handling terminals  such as 
ICDs  and Container Freight Stations (CFS)  
III) To p rovide warehousing  facility for import , export and domesti c at 
suitable location in India  and abroad . 
IV) To act as clearing and forwarding agent . 
V) To provide technical  know -how and management  services to any person, 
firm or body corporate . 
2. IRCON  International Limited  
 Brief: - IRCON  International Limited  (IRCON ), a government Company  was 
incorporated by the Central  Government  (Ministry  of R ailways ) under the 
Companies Act , 1956 on 28th April, 1976. The Company was set up with the 
objective  to carry out Railway  construction  works  in India  and or /abroad . I It has 
eleven (11) subsidiaries viz . IRCON Infrastructure  & Services  Limited, IRCON 
PB Tollway Limited, IRCON Shivpuri  Guna Tollway Limited, IRCON 
Davangere Haveri Highwal Ltd  (IDHHL), IRCON Varodara -Kim Expressway, 
IRCON Gurgaon rewari Highway Limited, IRCON Haridwar Bypass Limited, 
IRCON Akloli -Shirsad Expressway Ltd., IRCON Ludhiana Rupnagar Highway 
Ltd., IRCON Bhoj Morbe Expressway Ltd. And IRCON Renewable Power Ltd . 
As on 31st March 2022, there were three functional Directors  comprising of 
Chairman  & Managing Director , Director  (Finance ), Director (Projects ) and, two 
part-time Director and five Independent Directors.  
 Activities :- 
To carry out activities like Build -Operate  and Transfer  (BOT ), Build -Operate -
Own and Tran sfer (BOOT ) and Build -Lease  and Transfer (BLT ) and carry out 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
617 
For internal use of IA&AD  business relating to purchasing, selling, letting on lease or hire purchase  in India  
and or /abroad all kinds of machinery, plant, tools , jigs, fixtures, agricultural 
machinery, rolling stock , ships, trawlers, vessels, ships, barges, vehicles, 
construction  machinery, air  conditioning plants, air craft ’s and electronic  
equipment  and rendering leasing  consultancy  advisory services . To carry out 
business to commercial  operation  of air transport  services and other m odes of 
transport  including ships, trawlers, vessels, barges, automobiles and vehicles of 
every kind in passenger  as well as cargo .  
3. Rites Limited  (Rail  India  Technical  and Economic  Service  Ltd.) 
Brief: -RITES  Ltd. was incorporated on 26th April, 1974 to provide consultancy  
services to Railways  and inspection  of purchases made by Indian  Railways . The 
authorized capital  of the Company  as on 31st March, 2021 was Rs.240 crore . Its 
Registered Office  is in New  Delhi  and Corporate  Office is located at 
Gurugram.The Company was formed basically to provide consultancy services 
to Railways and inspection of purchases made by Indian Railways .  
 Activities :- 
 The Company  has subsequently diversified its activities to other fields of 
consultancies like roads, inland waterways, ports and harbours and airports . The 
Company has also taken up construction  management  contracts .   The general 
powers of the Company are vested in the Board  of Directors .The Company is 
headed by the Chairman  & Managing Director  who is assisted by Director  
(Finance ), Director (Technical ) and Director (Project  Studies .) and other 
executives of the Company . 
4. Indian  Railway  Catering  & Tourism  Corporation  Limited  (IRCTC ) 
 Brief: - Indian  Railway  and Tourism  Corporation  Limited (IRCTC ), a 
Govern ment  of India  undertaking under the auspices of Ministry  of Railways , 
was incorporated as a C ompany , on 27th  September 1999, as an extended arm of 
the Indian Railways  to upgrade, professionalize and manage the catering and 
hospitality services at stations , on trains  and other locations and to promote 
domestic and international  tourism through devel opment  of budget  hotels, special  
tour packages, information & commercial  publicity, global reservation  systems 
and to promote train based tourism in India . 
 Activitie s:- 
 The Company  has been doing the passenger  services oriented business lines like 
setting up of Food Plazas on Railway  premises, packaged drinking water  
‘Railneer ’, Rail  Tour  Packages and ‘Internet  Ticketing ’ bringing great deal of 
professionalism into the operations . The trial version of Next Generation  E-
Ticketing  (NGeT ) was launched in August 2014 . The Catering  and Hospitality  
segment of the Company includes Railway Catering and Hospitality and Non -
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
618 
For internal use of IA&AD  Railway catering and Hospitality . Only 4 Licensee operated units  and 208 
Departmental  units continue to be with IRCTC .Corporate  office of IRCTC is 
situated at New  Delhi , which is headed by the Chairman  & Managing Director , 
who is being assisted by three functional Directors , (Catering Services , Tourism  
& Marketing  and Finance ), and seventeen  Group  Gene ral Managers . 
5. Rail Vikas  Nigam  Limited (RVNL ) 
 Brief: -Rail Vikas  Nigam  Limited  (RVNL ) was incorporated on 24th January, 
2003 under the administrative control  of the Ministry  of Railways  with an 
objective  of undertaking project development , mobilizin g of resources , 
implementing the projects  thereby to strengthen the Indian  Railway  network .The 
functions  of the Company  are managed by the C hairman -cum-Managing Director  
at the helm assisted by four functional directors who were in -charge of projects , 
operation , finance and Personnel . The Company ha s 35 Project  Implementation 
Units  (PIUs ) spread all over the country for executing the works  and projects . 
 Activities :- 
 The Company  undertake project development , mobilizing of resources , 
implementing the projects  thereby to strengthen the Indian  Railway  network . 
6. Dedicated  Freight  Corridor Corporation  Limited  
 Brief: -The Dedicated  Freight  Corridor Corporation  of India  Limited , 
(DFCCIL ), New  Delhi  was incorporated as a Company  under Companies Act , 
1956 in October, 2006 under the Administrative  Control  of Ministry  of Railways  
(MoR ). The Company is headed by Managing Director  who is assisted by 
Directors  for discharging the functions  of the Company and the Chairman , 
Railway  Board  is the Part Time Chairman of the Company . At the end of March 
2021 , there was a Managing Director , four Functional Directors and five Part 
Time Directors .  
 Activities :-  
 Institutional Development  Activities and Designing, Planning , Construction , 
Maintenance  and Operation of Dedicated  Freight  Corridors . The Company  was 
incorporated with au thorized capital  of Rs.4,000 crore which has increased to 
Rs.8,000 crore (Rs.1000 /- per share ) and it ’s paid up capital stood at  Rs.7,658 .27 
crore as at the end of March, 2018 .  
7. Railtel  Corporation  Of India  Limited  (RCIL ) 
 Brief: -In order to build up a nation – wide optical Fibre  Cable based broadband 
telecom  and multimedia network , Rail -Tel Corporation  of India  (Company ) 
commenced its business with effect from 26th September , 2000 . The authorized 
and paid -up Share capital  of the Company as on 31st March, 2021  was Rs .1000    
crore and Rs . 320.94 crore respectively . Out of this Rs . 15 crore was received in 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
619 
For internal use of IA&AD  cash and remaining Rs . 305.94 crore was for consideration other than cash  against 
the OFC related assets  of Railways . It is a whol ly owned  subsidiary  of Ministry  
of Railways .The organization  of the Company is headed by the Chairman  and 
Managing Director , who is assisted b y three Functional Directors  (Net work  
Planning  & Marketing , Project  Operation & Maintenance  and Finance ), Group  
General  Managers , General Managers and other staff . 
 Activities :- 
I) To expeditiously modernize Railways  train control , operational  and safety  
system  and network . 
II) To create a nationwide broadband telecom  and multimedia network  to 
supplement  national telecom  infrastructure  super growth of telecom  
infrastructure  to super growth of telecom  internet and IT  enabled value 
added services in all parts of the country specially rural, remote and 
backward areas . 
III) To si gnificantly contribute to realization of goals and objectives  of 
National  Telecom  Policy , 1999 and  
IV) Generating much needed revenue for implanting Railways  
Developmental Pro jects, safety  enhancement and assets  replacement  
Programme . 
8. Indian  Railway  Financial  Corporation  Limited  (IRFC ) 
 Brief: -Indian  Railway  Finance  Corporation  Limited  (IRFC ) was incorporated in 
December, 1986 as a wholly Company  is headed by the Managing Director  
assisted by Director  (Finance ), Group  General  Manager  (Finance & 
Administration ), Company Secretary  & General Manager  (Term Loans ), General 
Manager (External Commercial  Borrowings ) and Joint  General Manager 
(Finance & Accounts ). The Financial  Commissioner  of Indian Railways  
functions  as Ex -Officio Chairperson of the Company .  
 Activities :-  
 The Company  is assigned the task of meeting the ‘Extra  Budgetary  Resources ’ 
(EBR ) requirements of Indian  Railways  as indicated in the Railway  Budgets  from 
year to year . IRFC acts as a financial  intermediary between the financial  market 
and Indian  Railways . 
9.  SIDCUL CONCOR  Infra Company  Ltd. 
 Brief: -SIDCUL CONCOR  Infra Company  Ltd. (SCICL), a Joint  Venture  
Company with shareholding of 74% and 26% of CONCOR and State  
Infrastructure  & Industrial  Development  Corporation  of Uttarakhand Ltd. 
(SIIDCUL) respectively. The Company is headed by Chief  Executive  Officer 
who is assisted by Chief Finance  Officer, Company Secretary . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
620 
For internal use of IA&AD   Activities :-  
 It has been incorporated for development  of logistics park  
at vantage points in the state of Uttarakhand. The JVC has developed a  
state of an art MMLP at Pantnagar. Authorized share capital  of the Company  
stands at Rs.100 crore divided at 100,00,000 equity share of Rs.10 each, the 
subscribed and paid up capital of the Company is Rs. 100 crore  which is held by 
CONCOR  and State  Infrastru cture  and Industrial  Development  Corporation  of 
Uttarakhand Ltd . in the ratio  of 74:26.   
10. CONCOR  Air Ltd. 
 Brief: -CONCOR  Air Ltd.(CONCOR Air), a wholly owned  subsidiary  Company  
of CONCOR, executed an agreement with MIAL (Mumbai  International Airport 
Pvt. Ltd.) on 18thFebruary 2013 to develop and op erate Domestic Air Cargo 
Terminal at Santacruz airport on BOOT basis.  The CONCOR AIR LIMITED is 
headed by Chairman  of CONCOR who is assisted by CEO , CFO, DGM, 
Manager , Asst.  Manager, Additional  Officer, Asst. Officer, Senior  Executive , 
Executive, Asst. Executive. All the executives are from their parent organization  
i.e. CONCOR and are transferred from CONCOR to CONCOR Air Ltd.  There is 
no regular employee of CONCOR Air Ltd. as on date.  
 Activities :- 
 CONCOR  Air took over the domestic cargo handling operations  at the existing 
CUT (common user domestic terminal ) of MIAL located at Marol w.e.f. 01st May 
2013.CONCOR Air will be shifting its domestic cargo handling operations  to 
SACT site once it is ready for commercial  operations . The period of c oncession 
is upto 30th September 20 24 with a provision for further extension on mutually 
agreed terms between MIAL and CAL.  
11. Fresh  and Healthy Enterprises  Ltd. 
 Brief: -The Fresh  and Healthy Enterprises  Limited , Rai (Sonipat) was 
incorporated on February 2006.The Company  was set up by the CONCOR , a PSU  
under Ministry  of Railways / Government  of India  as its fully owned  subsidiary  
Company. The Authorized capital  of the Company is Rs.250 crore and its issued, 
subscribed, and paid up capital is Rs.215.01 crore as on 31 March 2021.  The 
organization  is headed by a Chief  Executive  Officer who is assisted by G.M 
(CCP), Manager  Finance  & Company Secretary  and Asstt. Manager (HR ), Chief 
Financial  Officer and other technical  and non technical staff  for carrying out day 
to day functions .   
 Activities :-   
 The Company  is a fully owned  subsidiary  of CONCOR .The Company was set up 
with the objective  of Eliminating wastage of perishable food products by making 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
621 
For internal use of IA&AD  available state of the art Cold supply  Chain Infrastructure  at reasonable cost  in 
the country, thereby saving precious food products & foreign  exchange  for the 
country.  The  Company had constructed Control  Atmosphere(CA) cold stores  
measuring 12000 MT capacity however, due to continuous heavy losses suffered 
by the Company the C ompany has moved to leasing  model of business from 
earlier business of procurement , storage, and se lling of apple. However, still 
Company is incurring heavy losses in spite of changing of business model .   
12. Punjab Logistics Infrastructure  Limited  (PLIL ) 
 Brief: -Punjab Logistic s Infrastructure  Limited  (PLIL ) is a Joint  Venture  
Company  of Container  Corporation  of India  Limited  (CONC OR) & Punjab State  
Container and Warehousing Corporation Limited (PSWC). The Authorized shar e 
capital  of the C ompany is Rs. 250.00 crore as on 31st March 2021 . The 
organization  is headed by a Chief  Executive  Officer who is assisted by Chief 
Financial  Manager  & Company Secretary  for carrying out day to day functions . 
There is no employee/ offi cer on the roll  of PLIL till date. The Company has a 
Company Secretary, Chief Financial Officer, appointed on contractual basis. 
Employees  from CONCOR have been deputed on secondment basis.  
 Activities :- 
 The Company  is targeting to develop Logistics Hubs in the state of Punjab for 
facilitating trade and industry  of the state and putting them on International map.  
 The A uthorized share capital  of the C ompany  is Rs. 250.00 crore share  capital of 
the C ompany is fully paid up as on 31st March 2021 . The Company was set up 
with the objective  to market services of CONCOR  including bulk cargo 
movement in IR  wagons  and to facilitate  transportation of containers by rail /road 
from its terminals  to other terminals on Indian  Railways  network . 
13. IRCON  Infrastructure  Services  Limited  
 Brief: - Ircon Infrastructure  & Services  Limited  (A wholly owned  subsidiary  
of Ircon International Limited , A Govt . of India  Undertaking, under Ministry  of 
Railways ) was incorporated under the Companies Act , 1956 on 30th September, 
2009. The Company  has obtained a Certificate  of Commencement of Business  
on 10th November 2009 from the office of Registrar of Companies. IRCON  ISL, 
New  Delhi  is headed by Chief  Executive  Officer who is assisted by one General  
Manager  (Civil ), one Asst.  General Manager  (Civil), two Joint  General Manager 
(Civil), Deputy  General Manager (Civil), Deputy General Manager (Finance ) and 
other executives.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
 Activiti es:- 
  The main objects of the C ompany  are to undertake infrastructure  projects ; to 
carry on any infrastructure  construction  work  on Build -Operate -Transfer  (BOT), 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
622 
For internal use of IA&AD  Build -Own -Operate -Transfer (BOOT), Build -Lease -Transfer (BLT), etc. or 
otherwise or any other scheme or project found suitable in and related to the field 
of infrastructure projects  and other ancillary fields; planning , designing, 
development , improve ment, commissioning , operation , maintenance , etc. in the 
field of construction  of infrastructure of Multi  Functional Complexes  (MFCs), 
etc. to provide facilities and amenities  to users of Indian  Railway  System ; and all 
matters in the field of real estate and allied areas to make use of the opportunities 
that may arise. This includes providing project management , quality  
management , safety , health  and environment related consultancy  services to 
clients.  
14. IRCON  Davana gere Haveri Highway  Ltd (IDHHL ) 
 Brief: -Ircon  Davanagere Haveri Highway  Ltd.(IDHHL ), New  Delhi  was 
incorporated as a Company  under Companies Act , 2013 in May 2017, a 100% 
subsidiary  of Ircon International Ltd. The office is headed by Director  who is 
assisted by Chief  Executive  Officer and Chief Finance  Officer. T he   Chief 
executive  officer is working on contractual basis and other officers are on 
deputation  from IRCON . There is no permanent  emplo yee working on pay  roll 
of the C ompany.  
 Activities :- 
 The C ompany  was established  as a special  purpose vehicle  of IRCON  to 
implement the project  6 laning of Davangare – Haveri fr om Km 260+000 Km to 
338+923 of NH 48 in the state of Karnataka . Estimated cost  of the project is 
Rs.1177crore, the construction  period of project is 2.5 years and concession 
period in 15 years, the project is to be execut ed on the hybrid annuity model. The 
Ircon International Ltd is appointed EPC contractor of the project and the 
estimated cost  of project of EPC contract  is Rs.916.93 crore plus GST . 
15. Indian  Railway  Stations Development  Corporation  Limited  (IRSDCL ) 
 Brief: -Indian  Railway  Stations Development  Corporation  Limited  (IRSDC), a 
Joint  Venture  Company  of Rail  Land  Development Authority  (RLDA ), a 
statutory  authority  under the Ministry  of Railways  and Ircon International 
Limited (IRCON ) (A Govt . of India  Undertaking, under Ministry of Railways) 
was incorporated on 12th April, 2012. IR CON and RLDA holds equity stake in 
the ratio  of 50:50. Thus, IRSDC had recently been restructured as a deemed 
Government  Company. As on 31st March 2021 there were 10 directors (02 
functional and 08 non -functional). The BoD of the company is headed by 
Member  (Infrastructure ), Railway Board  as Ex -officio chairman . 
  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
623 
For internal use of IA&AD   Activities :- 
 IRSDC was set up with the objective  to develop/ re -develop the existing/new  
railway  stations  which will consist of upgrading the level of passenger  amenities  
and   to undertake projects  for development  of real estate on Railway / 
Government  land and its commercial  utilization.  
16. Railway  Energy  Management  Company  Limited  (REMCL ) 
 Brief: -The Railway  Energy  Management  Company  was incorporated on 16th 
August 2013 is a joint venture of RITES  Ltd & Ministry  of Railways . The 
Company has authorised share capital  of Rs. 1000 crore which is divided into  
1,00,00,00,000 equity shares of Rs.10 each. The issued, subscribed and paid up 
capital of the Company is Rs. 105 cr ore as on 31st March 2021. The share capital 
is held by RITES Ltd and Indian  Railways  in the ratio  of 51:49 percent. As on 
31st March, 2021, Board  of Directors  of the Comp any comprises Chairman  and 
six Directors. There is no employee on the Company pay  roll. The employees  of 
Rites are working in diverted capacity.  
 Activities :- 
 The objective  of exploring business opportunities in Green Energy , especially in 
the fields of wind and solar by installing windmills and solar plants for generating 
and selling renewable energy , mainly for railways consumpti on, facilitating cost  
efficiencies in the energy management  for railways through power  trading with 
power  exchanges. The C ompany  has its own 26 MW wind mill pla nt at Jaisalmer, 
the entire electrical energy generated from said plant.  
17. SAIL -RITES  Bengal Wagon  Industry Pvt. Limited  (SRWBIL ) 
 Brief: -SAIL -RITES  Bengal Wagon  Indus try Private  Limited  (SRBWIPL) is a 
joint Venture  Company  (JVC) of Steel  Authority  of India  (SAIL) and RITES 
Limited (RITES), each holding equal eq uity stake of 50%, SAIL is a Maharatna 
PSU and a Government  Company under the administrative control  of the 
Ministry  of Steel and RITES Ltd., a mini Ratna PSU under the administrative 
control  of the Ministry of Railways . The affairs of the Company are managed by 
Chief  Executive  Officer. CEO  is assisted by Chief Financial  Officer, Managers , 
Company Secretary  and Business  Manager , Assistant  Manager (F&A).  
 Activities :-  
 The C ompany  was setup with the objective  of set ting up the wagon  
manufacturing factory  and also any other related railway  infras tructure  required 
project. The C ompany manufactures wagons  including high  end specialized 
wagons  for Indian  Railways . 
 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
624 
For internal use of IA&AD  18. National  High  Speed  Rail Corporation  Limited  (NHRCCL ) 
 Brief: -National  High  Speed  Rail Corporation  Limited  (NHSRCL) is a 
government C ompany  in terms of the provision of section  2(45) of the Companies 
Act, 2013, and a joint venture between Government  of India , Government of 
Gujarat, and Government of Maharashtra with equity participation in the ratio  of 
50:25:25 respectively.  The affairs of Company are managed by Board  of 
Directors  which comprises Managing Director , Director  (Finance ), Director 
(Projects . The Board is as sisted by General  Managers , DGM, CFO. Total 9 3 
employees  are working in the C ompany.  
 Activities :-- 
 NHSRCL is implementing first High  Speed  Rail project of India  i.e. Mumbai -
Ahmedabad High Speed Rail Project  (MAHSR Project) based on Japan’s 
Shinkansen Technology  for which a Memorandum  of Cooperation was signed 
betwe en India and Japan on 12th December 2015. The MAHSR project will be 
state of the art technology  in passenger  transport  which would not only create 
employment opportunities but also boost economic  growth of the Country.  
19. Bharuch  Dahej Railway  Company  Limited  (BDRCL ) 
 Brief: -Ministry  of Railways  under the National  Rail Vikas  Yojana (NRVY) 
conceived an investment  plan for the rail  sector to eliminate capacity bottlenecks 
on Golden Quadrilateral and Diagonals, to provide strategic  rail communication  
links to ports, construction  of mega -bridges  for improving communication  to the 
hinterland and development  of multi -modal transp ort corridors . 
 Accordingly, one project taken up with a view to strengthen rail  connectivity to 
ports was to convert the existing narrow gauge  line between Bharuch  and Dahej 
to Broad  Gauge . The Bharuch Dahej Railway  Company  Limited  is one of the 
SPVs created for the development  of Railway infrastructure  through Public  
Private  Partnership . Bharuch Dahej Railway Co. Ltd was incorporated on 15th 
November 2006 and commenced business on 10th January 2007.The total landed 
cost of the project is estimated at Rs.395crores which is financed by equity Rs.165 
crore and debt of Rs.230 crore . The share holders are strategic  investors in the 
Project . The affairs of the Company are managed by Managing Director (MD). 
MD is assisted by Manager , Company Secretary  and General  Manager , Accounts  
Officer.  
 Activities : -  
 The project involves c onversion  of 62.36 Km long Bharuch , Samni, Dahej 
Narrow Gauge  Railway  line to Broad  gauge , so as to provide Broad Gauge Rail  
Connectivit y for Passenger  and Freight  Traffic  movement between Bharuch and 
Dahej.  An additional  5.2 Km link line shall be built to connect with the WR 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
625 
For internal use of IA&AD  Mainline at Chavaj (north of Bharuch) owing to  space constraints at Bharuch. 
The project line at its eastern end shall join the existing Western  Railway mainline 
from Virar to Vadodara  at Bharuch and Chavaj. Provision  shall also be made for 
junction  arrangements with the Western Dedicated  Freight Corridor as and when 
it comes up. As the line is categorized as a feeder route  to the Dedicated Freight 
Corridor, the line is designed to take a heavier axle  load of 25 tonnes involving 
use of heavier rails. The line shall be electrified to 25 KV AC traction standards  
to facilitate  interchange of traffic  with Western Railway.  
20. Kutch Railway  Company  Limited  (KRCL ) 
 Brief: - Ministry  of Railways  under National  Rail Vikas  Yojana has embarked 
upon strengthening of rail connectivity to various ports. Recent developments in 
ports in Gandhidham area have established  need for additional  freight  corridor to 
northern hinterland. Ministry of Railways decid ed to convert existing meter 
gauge  line between Gandhidham and Palanpur  (301 km). After RVNL  (a PSU  
under Ministry of Railways) came into being, this project was transferred to 
RVNL for execution . RVNL set up a Special  Purpose Vehicle  for gauge  
conversion  of Gandhidham -Palanpur and Kutch Railway  Company  was formed 
with equity contribution  from RVNL, Deendayal Port  Trust and Adani Ports & 
SEZ Ltd.  and Govt . of Gujarat to undertake the gauge  conversion  of 
Gandhidham -Palanpur meter gauge  of 301 km. KRC w as incorporated on 22nd 
January'  2004 under Companies Act , 1956. Ministry of Railways had leased  all 
the assets  including land , buildings , bridges , etc. on the above l ine to KRC for a 
period of 32 years and authorized KRC to finance, construct, operate, maintain 
and manage the Palanpur - Gandhidham section . KRC is headed by a Managing 
Director  and managed by a professional Board  of Directors  drawn from Ministry 
of Railways, WR, RVNL, DPT, APSEZs and Government  of Gujarat  
 Activities : - 
 KRCL  is the first Joint  Venture  promoted by RVNL . KRCL offers shorter and 
efficient rail  route  connecting Ports of Deendayal & Adani in State  of Gujarat and 
provided vital link to Northern  hinterland. It is capable to  operate double stack 
9'6" ISO  containers over its territory from Palanpur to Gandhidham as KRC has 
removed all the infringements for running  of Double  Decker Container  trains  
whic h will carry 180 containers instead of 90 per train which would save huge 
cost to the railways as well as the customers . It is equipped with latest technology  
available for mechanized maintenance  of P.Way and S&T  equipment  and 
outsourced non -core activities to optimize cost  of O&M in order to reduce the 
unit cost of operation . 
 
 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
626 
For internal use of IA&AD  21. Pipavav  Railway  Corporation  Limited  
 Brief: - To create a Special  Purpose Vehicle  (SPV), Pipavav  Railway  Corporation  
limited (PRCL) was set up in  May 2000  under Companies Act , 1956, as a Joint  
Venture  Company  with Indian  Railways  and Gujarat Pipavav Port  limited 
(GPPL) u nder a Shareholder's Agreement  having  50% equity participation of 
each party. The SPV was assigned the task of conversion  of meter gauge  line 
between Surendranagar and Rajula City to broad  gauge  and its further extension 
to Pipavav Port.  
 Activities :- 
 The Ministry  of Railways  has conferred concessional rights to PRCL, for 
constructing the broad  gauge rail line and thereafter operating & maintaining the 
said line for a period of  33 years', through a Concession Agreement  of 28th June 
2001. Under  Construction  Agreement between Western  Railway  and PRCL, 
Western Railway constructed and commissioned the broad  gauge  rail line, 
including the gauge  conversion  from meter gauge  to broad  gauge  between  
Surendranagar and Rajula (approximately 250kms)  and a new  broad  gauge  rail 
line between  Rajula and Pipavav  port (approximately 21 kms).  PRCL shall carry 
out the operations  and maintenance  of the rail  line through Western Railway, as 
their nominated operator.  
22. Krishnapatnam  Rail Company  Limited  
 Brief: - Krishnapatnam  Rail Company  Limited  (KRCL ) is a Special  Purpose 
Vehicle  comprising the Government  of Andhra Pradesh, Krishnapatnam Port  
Company Limited and Rail Vikas  Nigam  Limited, formed to provide rail  
connectivity to the port . The affair of the C ompany is  headed by the Managing 
Director  which is assisted by Director . 
 Activities :- 
 The Phase wise project is to construct a  dedicated 19 km railway  line connecting 
the port  to the Chennai -Kolkata  main line & 91 km new  broad  gauge  line between 
the port  and Obulavaripalle in Dr. Y S Rajasekhar Reddy District  (previously 
Cuddapah District), with an outlay  of Rs.600 crore. This rail  line will reduce the 
distance between the port  and the regions of south -eastern Karnataka and south -
western Andhra Pradesh by 70 km, thereby  saving substantial freight  cost. 
23. Haridaspur  Paradip Railway  Company  Limited , Bhubanaswer  
 Haridaspur - Paradip Railway  Company  Limited  (HPRCL), an SPV, was 
incorporated on 25th September 2006 to undertake Haridaspur Paradip Broad 
Gauge  Railway Link, for developing, financing, construction , operations  and 
maintenance  of an 82 km broad  gauge  single railway  link between Haridaspur 
and Paradip stations .Haridaspur Paradip Broad Gauge Railway Link was 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
627 
For internal use of IA&AD  sanctioned , primarily to cater the movement of freight , export of finished 
products of steel plants and imported  coking coal from Paradip to the industries. 
The industries located in Duburi and the iron ore deposits in Keonjhar district are 
in proximity to this rail  link. 
 The Company  received the mandate to finance, execute, maintain and operate 
Haridaspur  Paradip New  Railway  Line Project  of length 82 Kms. by entering into 
a Concession Agreement  (CA) with Ministry  of Railways , Government  of India  
on 20thDecember, 2007 on Built Own Ope rate and Transfer  (BOOT) basis.  
24. IRCON  Pb Tollway Ltd . 
 Brief: -IRCON  PB Tollway Ltd. incorporated on 30th September 2014 as a 
Wholly -owned  Subsidiary  (‘WOS’) by Ircon International Limited  (‘IRCON’) 
for executing the project of “Widening and Strengthening of the existing Bikaner 
& Phalodi Section  to Four lane from km 4.200 to km 55.250 and Two Lane with 
paved shoulder from Km 55. 250 to Km 163.500 of NH -15 on Build , Operate , and 
Transfer  (BOT) (Toll) basis in the State  of Rajasthan, in accordance with the 
terms of the concession agreement signed with NHAI” as its main bus iness 
object. The affairs of the Company  are managed by Chairman . Chairman is 
assisted by Director s, CEO , Chief  Financial  officer & Company secretary.  
 Activities :-To establish and steer the Company  towards development  of the 
Project  Highway , the Bikaner - Phalodi Section  on NH -15, in the State  of 
Rajasthan and ensuring the users of the project highway are benefitted thereof 
and achieving higher revenues from the constructed toll plazas. Constructing 
through site planning , scheduling of project activities, leveling and laying the 
land, installing systems for measuring quality  of construction . Responsibly 
monitoring  the implementation  and operationalization of the project. Ensuring 
increased usage  of highway over the tenure of concession by keeping a check on 
toll rates, enabling plying of more and more cars and commercial  vehicles.  
25. IRCON  Shivpuri  Guna Tollway Limited  
 Brief: -Ircon SGTL, being a wholly -owned  subsidiary  of Ircon International 
Limited . Ircon  SGTL has been incorpor ated to execute the project of  four laning 
of Shivpuri  Guna section  of NH-3 from km 236.00 to km 332.100 (97.74 Km) in 
the state of Madhya Pradesh as per the terms and conditions of the Concession 
Agreement  entered into with National  Highway  Authority  of Indi a (NHAI). The 
total project cost  is Rs.872.11 crore and the EPC contract  cost is Rs.642 crore. 
The total length of road to be constructed is 97.70 Km (Four Laning) and in 
equivalent 2 lane is 170.60 K m in first phase of construction . The affairs of the 
Company  are managed by Chairman . Chairman is assisted by Director , CEO , 
Chief  Financial  officer & Company secretary.  
 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
628 
For internal use of IA&AD  Activities :-  
 The Company  has commenced construction  of project highway and the work  is 
continuously progressing. Company is making physical  and financial  progress in 
terms of the scheduled timeline mandated by the Concession Agreement  signed 
with NHAI for completion  of construction  within 910 days from the Appointed 
Date being 25th January 2016 (‘Commercial  Date of Operations ’ - COD) and 
commissioning  the tollway operations .  
26. IRCON  VADODARA -KIM EXPRESSWAY  
 Brief: -Ircon Vad odara  Kim Expressway Limited  (IrconVKEL), a wholly owned  
subsidiary  of Ircon International Limited was incorporated on 16th May, 2018 as 
a Special  Purpose Vehicle  (SPV) for executing the project works  of “in the State  
of Gujarat by NHAI. The affairs of the Company  are managed by Chairman . 
Chairman is assisted by Director , CEO , Chief  Financial  officer & Company 
secretary  
 Activities :-  
 The main object of IrconVKEL is to carry on the business of development , 
maintenance  and management  of Eight lane Vadodara  Kim Expressway from Km 
323.00 to Km 355.00 (Sanpa to Padra Section  of Vadodara Mumbai  Expressway) 
in the State  of Gujarat under NHDP Phase – VI Hybrid A nnuity Mode (Phase IA -
Package II) on design , build, finance, operate and transfer basis. The concession 
agreement has been signed with NHAI on 25th May, 2018.  
27. Surat Integrated  Transportation  Deve lopment  Corporation  Ltd. 
 Brief: -Surat Integrated  Transportation  Development  Corporation  Limited  
(SITCO) was incorpora ted on 17th October, 2017 with equity participation by 
Indian  Railway  Stations Development Corporation Limited (IRSDC), Gujarat 
State  Road  Transport  Corporation (GSRTC) and Surat M unicipal  Corporation 
(SMC) in the ratio  of 63:34:3 respectively.   
 Activities :-  
 The main object of SITCO is to develop/ re -develop an international  standard 
integrated  Multi  Modal Transportation  Hub which shall integrate all public  
transportation modes such as city bus, bus rapid transportation system , state 
regional  bus service , metro rail , railways and intermediate public  transportation 
modes such as auto rickshaw and taxis consisting of upgrading the level of 
passenger  amenities  by new  constructions /renovations including redevelopment 
of the station buildings , platform surfaces, circulating area, etc., to better 
standards  so as to serve the need of the passengers . 
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
629 
For internal use of IA&AD  28. Railtel  Enterprises  Limited  
 Brief: RailTel Enterprises  Limited ” (REL)is a wholly owned  subsidiary  
Company  of Rail Tel Corporation  of India  Limited - a "Mini Ratna (Category -I)" 
PSU Keeping in view the expanding activities in project execution  works  for 
telecom  and signalling . RailTel incorporated a wholly owned  subsidiary  
Company in August, 2014 by the name “RailTel Enterprises Limited” (REL).  
RailTel is in the forefront in providing nationwide Broadband Telec om & 
Multimedia Network in all parts of the country in addition to modernization of 
Train  operations  and administration network  systems . 
 Activities :-  
 REL is taking up turnkey project wo rk for creation, management  and operation 
in the areas of IT, Telecom, Networking, Data cetre and Railway’s Information  
& Communication  Technology (ICT) and S&T  projects. The affairs of the 
Company  are managed by Chairman . Chairman is assisted by Director  (Finance ) 
& Director (Technical ). 
29. NRTU  Foundation  
 Brief: -NRTU  Found ation is the non -profit  Company  registered under the section  
8 of the companies ’ act 2013, was incorporated on 4th May 2018. The C ompany 
was set up with the objective  to pro mote establish, develop construct, administer 
and carry on all types of education, research  and development  in field in any 
manner by including establishing of universities, schools, college institute.  
 Activities :-   
 National  Rail & Transportation  Institute  (Deemed University) setup by NRTU  
foundation to promote, establish, develop construct, administer and carry on a ll 
types of education, research  and development  in field in any manner by including 
establishing of universities, schools, college institute.  
30. High  Speed  Rail Corridor Corporat ion Limited  
 Brief: -High  Speed  Rail Corridor Corporation  Limited  is a 100% w holly owned  
subsidiary  of Rail V ikas Nigam  Limited. The Company  was incorporat ed under 
the provisions of the Companies A ct, 1956 on July 25, 2012.  The Company is 
headed by Chairman  and is assisted by Director (Finance ), Director(Projects ) & 
Director(Operations ) 
 Activities :-  
 The Company  was incorporated with objective  of carrying out Business  related 
to planning , designing development , construction , manufacturing, assembling, 
fabricating, processing, installing, maintenance , operation  & fi nancing of 
Railway  Infrastructure  & related logistics support  systems, including rolling 
stock  of all types in India  & abroad of High  speed  rail projects  & other rail  based 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
630 
For internal use of IA&AD  traffic  as may be approved  by Government  of India or Rail  Vikas  Nigam  limited 
or any other such Competent  limited.  
31. IRCON Gurgaon Rewari Highway Limited (IrconGRHL)  
Brief: - IrconGRHL, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ircon, has been incorporated 
as a Special Purpose Vehicle on 24th December, 2020. The main object of 
Ircon GRHL is to carry on the business of “Upgrading of Gurgaon -Pataudi -
Rewari section of NH -352W as a feeder route in the State of Haryana, in 
accordance with the terms of concession agreement with National Highways 
Authority of India  (NHAI). The concession agreement has been signed with the 
client -NHAI on 20th January, 2021 and the final set of complied documents 
required for financial closure have been submitted to NHAI well within time 
schedule i.e. 16th July, 2021.  
Activities: - 
Ircon Gurgaon Rewari Highway Limited (IrconGRHL), a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Ircon International Limited (IRCON) incorporated on 24th 
December, 2020 as a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for executing the project 
works in the State of Haryana by National Highways Authori ty of India  (NHAI). 
The main object of IrconGRHL is to carry on the business of “Upgrading of 
Gurgaon -Pataudi -Rewari section of NH -352W from 0 km to 43.87 km (design 
length 46.11 km) as a feeder route on Hybrid Annuity Mode under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana in the State of Haryana. IrconGRHL has signed the EPC Agreement 
with Ircon International Limited (‘Ircon’) for execution of the project work of on 
EPC mode at a total cost of 606.54 Crore plus12% GST.  
32. IRCON Haridwar Bypass Limited  
Brief: - Ircon International Limited (IRCON) has incorporated a Wholly Owned 
Subsidiary Company named "Ircon Haridwar Bypass Limited" on 13th January, 
2022 as a Special Purpose Vehicle for the purpose of upgradation and Four 
Laning of Haridwar Bypass Package in the S tate of Uttarakhand on Hybrid 
Annuity Mode.  
 Activities: - 
National Highways Authority of India  (NHAI) has awarded the work of 
upgradation and Four Laning of Haridwar Bypass Package in the State of 
Uttarakhand on Hybrid Annuity Mode to IRCON. The business of Ircon 
Haridwar Bypass Limited is in line with the main line of business of the Company 
(i.e. IRCON).  
33.  IRCON Akloli -Shirsad Expressway Limited  
Brief: - Ircon International Limited (IRCON) has incorporated a Wholly Owned 
Subsidiary Company  named "Ircon Akloli -Shirsad Expressway Limited" on 23rd 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
631 
For internal use of IA&AD  December, 2021 as a Special Purpose Vehicle for the purpose of construction of 
Eight lane access controlled expressway from Km 3.0000 to Km 20.200 (Shirsad 
to Akloli Section -SPUR of Vadodra Mumbai  Expressway) in the State of 
Maharashtra on Hybrid Annuity Mode under Bharatmala Pariyojana (Phase II - 
Package XIV).  
Activity: - 
The main activity of company is to constrct eressway in the State of Maharshtra 
on Hybrid Annuity Mode under Bharat mala Pariyojana. As per the Letter of 
Award issued by NHAI, the aforesaid work will be executed by IRCON Akloli -
Shirsad Expressway Limited. The business of IRCON Akloli -Shirad Expressway 
Limited is in line with the main line of business of the Company (i.e . IRCON).  
34. IRCON Ludhiana Rupnagar Highway Limited  
Brief :- Ircon International Limited (IRCON) has incorporated a Wholly Owned 
Subsidiary Company named "Ircon Ludhiana Rupnagar Highway Limited" on 
24th December, 2021 as a Special Purpose Vehicle for the  purpose of construction 
of four/six lane Greenfield Ludhiana Rupnagar National Highway no. NH -205K 
from junction with NE -5 village near Manewal (Ludhiana) to junction with NH -
205 near Bheora Village (Rupnagar) including spur to Kharar with Ludhiana 
bypass  under Bharatmala Pariyojana in the State of Punjab on Hybrid Annuity 
Mode.  
Activity: - 
National Highways Authority of India  (NHAI) has awarded the work for 
construction of four/ six lane Greenfield Ludhiana -Rupnagar National Highway 
no. NH -205 from junction with NE -5 village near Manewal (Ludhiana) to 
junction with NH -205 near Bheora Village (Rupnagar) including spur to Kharar 
with Ludhiana bypass under Bharatmala Pariyojana in the State of Punjab on 
Hybrid Annuity Mode to IRCON. The business of Ircon Ludhiana Rupnagar 
Highway Limited is in line with the main line of business of the Company 
(IRCON).  
35.  IRCON Bhoj Morbe Expressway Limited  
Brief :- Ircon International Limited (IRCON) has incorporated a Wholly Owned 
Subsidiary Company named "Irco n Bhoj Morbe Expressway Limited" on 06th 
January, 2022 as a Special Purpose Vehicle for the purpose of construction of 
Eight Lane Access Controlled Expressway from Km 69.800 to Km 79.783 (Bhoj 
to Morbe Section -SPUR of Vadodra Mumbai  Expressw ay) in the State of 
Maharashtra on Hybrid Annuity Mode under Bharatmala Pariyojana.  
 
 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
632 
For internal use of IA&AD  Activity: - 
National Highways Authority of India  (NHAI) has awarded to IRCON the work 
for construction of Eight Lane Access Controlled Expressway from Km 69. 800 
to Km 79.783 (Bhoj to Morbe Section -SPUR of Vadodra Mumbai  Expressway) 
in the State of Maharashtra on Hybrid Annuity Mode under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana (Phase II - Package XVII). The business of Wholly owned subsidiary 
is in line with the main line of business of the Company.  
36.  IRCON Renewable Power Limited  
Brief :- Ircon International Limited has incorporated a Subsidiary and Joint 
Venture Company named "Ircon Renewable Power Limited" on 13th January, 
2022 as Special Purpose Vehicle (wit h 76% shareholding of Ircon International 
Limited and 24% shareholding of Ayana Renewable Power Private Limited) for 
setting up of 500 MW Grid Connected Solar PV Project awarded by Indian 
Renewable Energy Development  Agency Limited.  
Activity: - 
Setting up of 500 MW Grid Connected Solar Power Plant under the Central  
Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) Scheme phase -II (Government Procedure 
Scheme) as per the terms and conditions floated by Indian Renewable Energy 
Development  Agency Limited, and other ancillary works in relation thereto.   
Railway Audit Manual  
 
633 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure -II  
A. During Compliance  audit  the following records are reviewed in all these 30 
PSUs ; 
I) Agenda  & minute s of Board  of Directors  (BOD ). 
II) Internal  audit  reports . 
III) Registe r of records maintained by the C ompany . 
IV) Annual  reports of the C ompany . 
V) List of contracts  awarded during the year . 
VI) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activities . 
VII) Time to time  circulars  issued by MOR . 
VIII) Different manuals  issued by the C ompany . 
IX) Different circulars  issued by the management . 
X) Stock /Asset  Register  along  with Physical  Verification  Report . 
XI) Revenue  sharing with MOR . 
XII) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
XIII) In case lim ited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
XIV)  Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
B. During the course of audit , the following aspect are seen : 
I) Container  Corporation  of India  Limited  (CONCOR ). 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of projec t/works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expendi ture incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review of bad debts written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis -presentation 
is not given  to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) Discounts  are gi ven to the parties as per the rules . No undue  benefit 
was given to any party . 
f) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
g) Whether  the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
h) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
634 
For internal use of IA&AD  i) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Compan y. 
j) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
k) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
oppor tunity to participate . 
l) Whether  the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
m) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
receive d before the start of work  by the contractor . 
n) Whether  consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
o) PRP is distributed as per the guidelines  issued by DPE . 
II) IRCON  International Limited  
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
-the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out 
any penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of 
liquidated  damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE  
c) Review  of writing of bad debts is proper and no  undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and repo rts are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour  
f) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
g) Formation  of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
h) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
i) In case of limited tendering  all the  empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate . 
j) Whether  the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
k) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contracto r. 
l) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
III) RITES  Limited  
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
635 
For internal use of IA&AD  penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review  of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentat ion 
is not  given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour  
f) Whether  the Company  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation  of Jo int Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
h) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
i) To revie w whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case  of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate . 
k) whet her the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
m) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
IV) Indian  Railway  Catering  & Tourism  Corporation  Limited  (IRCTC ) 
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the C ompany , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued und er 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review  of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) Payments  for the services provided in the trains  are being received 
regularly . 
f) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
636 
For internal use of IA&AD  g) Whether  the food plaza /fast food are awarded within time . 
h) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
i) Formation  of subsidiary  really required by the Company. 
j) Licence  fee from the licensees are being received regularly if not 
action  taken against them . 
k) Empanelment  of vendors  is properly done to review whether the open 
tenderi ng process is fair and transparent . 
l) In case  of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate . 
m) Whether  the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
n) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contra ctor. 
o) Whether  consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
V) Rail Vikas  Nigam  Limited  (RVNL ) 
a) Whether  there is delay in  the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the C ompany , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review  of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the t our. 
f) Whether  the Company  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
h) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
637 
For internal use of IA&AD  VI) Dedicated  Freight  Corridor Corporation  Limited  
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded b y 
the C ompany , reasons for this delay  to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review of writing of bad debts is proper and no  undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies  sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
f) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railwa y freight . 
g) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the Company . 
h) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
i) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate  
k) whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
m) whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
VII) Railtel  Corporation  of India  Limited  (RCIL ) 
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to f ind out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity as per guidelines  issued un der 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review  of writing of bad debts is proper and no  undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any misrepresentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
638 
For internal use of IA&AD  e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
f) Whether  the Company  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are isas per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the C ompany . 
h) Formation of sub sidiary  really required by the  Company . 
i) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fai r 
opportunity to participate . 
k) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
l) Whether the sharing of revenue from optic fibre with MOR  is received 
properly . 
m) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
n) Whether  consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
VIII)  Indian  Railway  Financial  Corporation  Limited  (IRFC ) 
a) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per gui delines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
b) Whether the Rolling  stock  are identified by MOR  immediat ely after 
giving advance to the MOR . 
c) Review  of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour , if any , 
is given to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better  rating  in MOU . 
e) Whether the award  of contract  regarding rating  for the Company  are 
properly executed . 
f) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the o fficials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
g) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
lease assets . 
h) Borrowings  are done in the best interest  of the Company  and expenses  
are recovered while fixing the lease rental from MOR  and interest  
from RVNL .  
 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
639 
For internal use of IA&AD  IX) SIDCUL CONCOR  Infra Company  Limited  
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Compa ny, reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelinesissued by DPE . 
c) Review  of bad debts  written off  is proper a nd no  undue  favour is given 
to debto rs. 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
f) Whether  the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the C ompany . 
h) Formation of subsi diary  really required by the Company . 
i) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate . 
k) Whether  the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions . 
l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / perfo rmance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
m) Whether  consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
X) CONCOR  Air Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of  the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation  
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
640 
For internal use of IA&AD  e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) Whether  the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation of Join t Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the working of the C ompany . 
h) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
i) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
k) Whethe r the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
m) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XI) Fresh and Healthy enterprises limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the  Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad  debts  written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) Formation of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actu ally 
required for the working of the Company . 
h) Formation of subsidiary  really required by the Company . 
i) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
j) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
k) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
641 
For internal use of IA&AD  l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
m) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired a s per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XII) Punjab Logistic s Infrastructure  Limited  (PLIL ) 
a) Whether  there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarde d by 
the C ompany , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelinesissued by DPE . 
c) Review  of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as p er RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour . 
f) Formation  of Joint  Venture  are as per the guidelines  and actually 
required for the wor king of the C ompany . 
g) Formation  of sub sidiary  really required by the Company . 
h) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and trans parent . 
i) In case  of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate . 
j) Whether  the estimates  are prepared properly considering th e market 
conditions . 
k) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor . 
n) Whether  consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XIII)  IRCON  Infrastructure  Services  Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of pr oject /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section 135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written  off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
642 
For internal use of IA&AD  d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tenderin g process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contrac tor. 
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR  
XIV)  IrconDavanagere Haveri Highway  Ltd (IDHHL )  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad deb ts written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) Discounts  are given to the parties as per the rules . No undue  benefit 
was given to any party.  
f) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and r ules and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
g) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
h) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
i) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
j) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
k) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
643 
For internal use of IA&AD  XV) Indian  Railway  Stations Development  Corporation  Limited  
(IRSDCL ) 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of pro ject/works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expe nditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) Discounts  are given to the parties as per the rules . No undue  benefit 
was given to any party.  
f) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
g) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
h) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
i) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
j) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
k) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XVI)  Railway  Energy  Management  Company  Limited  (REMCL ) 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incur red on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fai r and transparent . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
644 
For internal use of IA&AD  g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly con sidering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemploy ed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XVII)  Sail-Rites Bengal Wagon  Industry Pvt. Limited  (SRWBIL ) 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tende ring process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the cont ractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XVIII)  National  High  Speed  Rail Corporation  Limited  (NHRCCL ) 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was im posed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
645 
For internal use of IA&AD  d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XIX)  Bharuch  Dahej Rail  Company  Limited  
a) Revenue  sharing  between the C ompany  & the R ailway  is as per the 
agreement  
b) Operation & maintenance  expenses  charged by railways are as per the 
O&M agreement  
c) Administrative  cost & other expenses  charged by RVNL  are as per 
the agreement.  
d) Whether the C ompany  has HR  manual  & delegation of power  is 
followed or not.  
e) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to fin d out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
f) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued u nder 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
g) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
h) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight. 
i) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XX) Kutch Railway  Company  Limited  
a) Revenue  sharing  between the C ompany  & the R ailway  is as per the 
agreement . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
646 
For internal use of IA&AD  b) Operation & m aintenance  expenses  charged by R ailways  are as per 
the O&M agreement . 
c) Administrative  cost & other expenses  charged by RVNL  are as per 
the agreement.  
d) Whether the C ompany  has HR  manual  & delegation of power  is 
followed or not.  
e) Whether t here is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of li quidated  
damages . 
f) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
g) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on hi s return from the tour.  
h) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
i) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXI)  Pipavav  Railway  Corporation  Limited  
a) Revenue  sharing  between the C ompany  & the R ailway  is as per the 
agreement . 
b) Operation & maintenance  expenses  charged by railways are as per the 
O&M agreement . 
c) Administrative  cost & other expenses  charged by RVNL  are as per 
the agreement.  
d) Whether the C ompany  has HR  manual  & delegation of power  is 
followed or not.  
e) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
f) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
g) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
h) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reco nciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
i) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
647 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXII)  Krishnapatnam  Rail Company  Limited  
a) Revenue  sharing  between the C ompany  & the R ailway  is as per the 
agreement.  
b) Operation & m aintenance  expens es charged by R ailways  are as per 
the O&M agreement . 
c) Administrative  cost & other expenses  charged by RVNL  are as per 
the agreement.  
d) Whether the Company  has HR  manual  & delegation of power  is 
followed or not.  
e) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
f) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guideli nes issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
g) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guideline s and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
h) Whether the Company  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for the ir 
railway  freight . 
i) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXIII)  Haridaspur  Paradip Railway  Company  Limited , Bhubaneswar  
a) Revenue  sharing  between the C ompany  & the R ailway  is as per the 
agreement.  
b) Operation & m aintenance  expenses  charged by R ailways  are as per 
the O&M agreement . 
c) Administrative  cost & other expenses  charged by RVNL  are as per 
the agreement.  
d) Whether the C ompany  has HR  manual  & delegation of power  is 
followed or not.  
e) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed a nd to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
f) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
g) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
648 
For internal use of IA&AD  h) Whether the Company , is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
i) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXIV)  IRCON  PB Tollway Ltd  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of proje ct/works  awarded by 
the C ompany , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expend iture incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the C ompanies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of writing of bad debts  is proper and no  undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies  sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
railway  freight . 
g) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
h) In case of limited t endering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
i) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
j) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
k) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXV)  IRCON  Shivpuri  Gunatollway Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find ou t any 
penalty  was imposed or not,  reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as pe r guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether  the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
649 
For internal use of IA&AD  e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidel ines and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMD s/security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the  guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXVI)  IRCON  Vadodara -Kim Expressway  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for t his delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per gui delines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case o f limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guid elines  
of MOR . 
XXVII)  Surat Integrated  Transportation  Development  Corporation  Ltd. 
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of proj ect/works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
650 
For internal use of IA&AD  b) Expen diture  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written o ff is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
k) Revenue  collection from the stations  is being properly monitored and 
share is received by the Compan y. 
XXVIII)  Railtel  Enterprises  Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not , reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts  written off  is proper an d no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies se nt to MOR  are correct or any mis -representation 
is not given  to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) Whether the C ompany  is prompt in reconciliation  with MOR  for their 
revenue  share.  
g) Formation  of sub sidiary  really required by the C ompany . 
h) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
i) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
651 
For internal use of IA&AD  j) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
k) Whether the sharing of revenue from optic fibre with MOR  is received 
properly.  
l) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
m) Whether consultants /reemp loyed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXIX)  NRTU  Foundation  
a) Whether the fee is being collected regularly.  
b) Expenditure  incurred on the hostel facilities to be checked prop erly. 
c) Educational  Qualification  of the professor are to be seen  
d) Payment of Consultancy  fee to be reviewed.  
e) Mess  Expenditure  may also be checked.  
f) Students welfare  expenditure  may be seen.  
g) Whether the money collected & kept in FDR. Funds  were regularly 
collected.  
h) Entrance Test fees is collected regularly . 
XXX)  High  Speed  Rail Corrid or Corporation  
a) D&G charges  recovered through RVNL  on Transfer  of Projects . 
b) Review of Project  expenditure  incurred on MoR funded project 
through RVNL . 
c) Fund s are properly utilised by the C ompany . 
d) Whether the feasibility  studies are completed within the time  frame  
XXXI)   IRCON Gurgaon Rewari Highway Limited  
a) Whether th ere is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liq uidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his retur n from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
652 
For internal use of IA&AD  g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportu nity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXXII)  IRCON Haridwar Bypass Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the complet ion of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The e xpenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whethe r the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXXII ) IRCON Akloli -Shirsad Expressway Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the comple tion of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE . 
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
653 
For internal use of IA&AD  d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review  whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Wheth er the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXXIV )     IRCON Ludhiana Rupnagar Highway Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad  debts written off is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the op en tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimate s are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whether consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXXV )      IRCON Bhoj Morbe Expressway Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
654 
For internal use of IA&AD  penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expendit ure incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper any undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fair and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly considering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
j) Whe ther consultants /reemployed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
XXXVI )  IRCON Renewable Power Limited  
a) Whether there is delay in the completion  of project /works  awarded  by 
the Company , reasons for this delay to be analysed and to find out any 
penalty  was imposed or not, reasons for non -imposition of liquidated  
damages . 
b) Expenditure  incurred on CSR  activity is as per guidelines  issued under 
Section  135 of the Companies Act  and guidelines  issued by DPE.  
c) Review of bad debts written off is proper and no undue  favour is given 
to debtors . 
d) Whether the replies sent to MOR  are correct or any mis presentation 
is not given to MOR to get better rating  in MOU . 
e) The expenditure  incurred on the tour of the  officials are as per RBI  
guidelines  and rules  and reports  are submitted by the concerned 
officer on his return from the tour.  
f) To review whether the open tendering  process is fa ir and transparent . 
g) In case of limited tendering  all the empanelled  vendors  are given fair 
opportunity to participate.  
h) Whether the estimates  are prepared properly co nsidering the market 
conditions.  
i) Whether EMDs /security  deposit / performance  guarantee are being 
received before the start of work  by the contractor.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
655 
For internal use of IA&AD  j) Whether consultants /reemplo yed staff  are hired as per the guidelines  
of MOR . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter 20 – Rail Public Sector Undertakings  
 
656 
For internal use of IA&AD  Annexure – III 
Directions to Statutory  Auditor  under Section  143(5) of Companies Act  2013. 
The existing three directions issued to Statutory  Auditor  under Section  143(5) of 
the Companies Act , 2013  have been reviewed and replace d by the O/o C&AG  of 
India  with the following new  directions. These directions will be applicable for 
accounts  from FY 2018 -19 onwards: - 
I) Whether the C ompany  has system  in place to process all the accounting 
transactions through IT  system ? If yes, the implications of processing of 
accounting transactions outside IT system  on the integrity of the accounts  
along with  the financial  implications, if any, may be stated.  
II) Whether there is any restructuring of an existing loan or cases of 
waiver/write off  of debs/loans /interes t etc. made by a lender to t he 
Company  due to C ompany’s inability to repay the loan? If yes, the 
financial  impact  may be stated.  
III)    Whether funds received/receivable for specific schemes from 
Central /State  agencies were properly accounted for/utilized as per its term 
and conditions? List  the cases of deviation.  
  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
657 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
658 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 21 - RESEARCH DESIGNS AND STANDARDS 
ORGANIZATION  
1.  INTRODUCTION  
Research  Designs  and Standards  Organization  (RDSO ) was established  in 1957 
as an attached office of Railway  Board . The status of RDSO has been changed 
from an 'Attached Office ' to 'Zonal  Railway' with effect from 1st January, 2003.  
RDSO  has been instrumental  in identification  & assimilation  of technology  
suitable for Indian  operating & climatic condition and has ensured rightful 
adap tation of imported  technologies , wherever felt necessary.  RDSO’s role is of 
applied research  and of a facilitator for technology development , adaption, 
standardization , and deployment  for the Indian Railways  as an advisor and not 
the executor.  RDSO undertakes  service  engineering  studies and also tests 
products of equip ment  vendors  for compliance to the respective specifications .  
RDSO discharges its duties as Technical  Adviser  to the Ministry  of Railways.  
This is  the premier  research, design  and standards  organization  set up with a view 
to evolve appropriate design of Railway  equipment  and systems for improved 
safety , reliability and maintainability.  RDSO also carries out validation of 
designs  by way of performance  trials  under defined operating conditions.  
2.  FUNCTIONS OF RDSO  
RDSO  functions  as a centre for acquisition , absorption  and development  of new  
technology  and up -gradation of existing technology for the In dian Railways . 
RDSO is the sole R&D  organization  of Indian Railways  and functions as the 
technical  advisor to Railway  Board  (RB), Zonal  Railways (ZRs) and Production  
Units  (PUs ). Its major  functions involve:  
I) Maintenance  of overall system  standards  for the Indian  Railways  
II) Development , adoption & absorption  of new  technologies  for use on 
Indian  Railways  
III) Develop ment  of new  & improved designs  
IV) Development  of standards  for materials  & products for Indian  Railways  
V) Technical  investigation, statutory clearance, testing , technical  guidance  to 
zonal railways and providing consultancies.  
VI) Service  engineering  to improve reliability and sa fety of 
equipment /product/rolling stock /asset  affecting train operation  
VII) Vendor  approval  and inspection of critical & safety  items of Rolling  
stock , Locomotives , Signalling  and Telecommunications  equipment  and 
Track  components  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
659 
For internal use of IA&AD  RDSO  also offers international  consultancy  services in matters pertaining to 
design , testing  and inspection of railway  equipment  as w ell as survey  for 
construction  of new  lines .  
3.  ORGANIZATIONAL SET UP  
RDSO , Lucknow is under the Ministry  of Railways  and is headed by the Direct or 
General , ex-officio General Manager  who is assisted by an Additional  Director 
General  and Senior  Executive  Directors /Executive Directors controlling the 
various directorates of RDSO.  
All the directorates of RDSO  except Defense  Research  are located at Lucknow.  
The cell  for Railway  Production  Units  and Industries  which look after liaison, 
inspection and development  work , are located at Bangalore, Hyderabad, Bhopal, 
Mumbai , Burnpur, Jai pur, Kolkata  and New  Delhi . The Indian  Railways  Centre  
for Advanced  Maintenance  Technology  (CAMT ECH ) which is located at 
Gwalior is also functioning under administrative  control  of RDSO.  
4.  SYSTEM OF AUDIT  
The System  of Central  Audit  for RDSO  is applicable as being defined in Secret  
Memorandum  of Instructions  & Revised  Audit Norms  2003.  
5.  LOCAL AUDIT/INSPECTIONS  
Regulations  on Audit  and Accounts , 2007, stipulate three type of audits viz. 
Financial  Audit, Compliance  Audit & Performance  Audit.  Local  Audit is a part 
of compliance audit  under which audit  party checks  the records of auditee through 
visit at their offices.  
Compliance  with rules  and regulations  is the primary and the most importan t 
requirement for ensuring accountability of the public  executive .  Proper  planning  
and prioritization of Compliance Audits based on an appropriate risk assessment , 
is ther efore of great importance. Thus, for an effective Audit , the two important 
resources  i.e. time  and manpower  have to be assigned properly to get quality  audit  
output . 
Para 3.12 of Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines  lays emphasis on preparation of 
Annual  Audit  Plan by each field office by adopting a holistic  approach of 
covering Apex  Auditable  Entity  for each type of audit  and leveraging common 
processes. The Annual Audit Plan of each office would, therefore, indicate the 
Apex Auditable entities/Audit units  for which compliance audit  to be conducted.  
Para 3.4 of the Compliance  Auditing  Guidelines  suggests  a top down  Risk Based 
approach for placing the Department/Sector  as the centre piece  of the audit  focus 
and provide a scientific  mechanism of defining Audit  Units .  Departments /Sector 
being the top layer has been defined as the Apex  Auditable  Entity . 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
660 
For internal use of IA&AD  List of Items to be checked during the inspection of various D irectorates is 
given in Appendix -A. 
6.  USE OF IT  APPLICATIONS IN RDSO  
The IT  applications  being used at RDSO  are as under - 
I) Online  complaint  management  system  
II) Failure  Reporting and Vendor  Performance  Monitoring  System  
III) Hospital  Management  Information  System  
IV) Vendor  Registration Module  
V) Product  Inspection  Management  System  (PIMS ) 
VI) Integrated  Material  Management  information system  (IMMIS ) 
VII) Indian  Railway  E-procurement  system    (IREPS ) 
VIII) Integra ted Payroll  and accounting system  (IPAS ) 
IX) LIMBS  (Legal  Management  Briefing System  for court  cases)  
X) CPGRAM  (Centralized  Public  Grievance  Redress and Monitoring  
System ).  
XI) PMIS  (Personnel  management  Information  System ) 
XII) IRPSM  (Indian  Railway  Project  Sanction  management  system ) 
XIII) e-Office 
The audit of IT applications ma y carried out/conducted as per the instructions  
istructions/guidelines issued by Hdqrs. office.  
7.  IMPORTANT RISK PARAMETERS  
I) Sanctioned  project and its progress in reference to physical  as well as 
financial .  
II) Allotment  of funds and its utilization for a particular project.  
III) No. of tender  cases /contract  cases executed by the directorate . 
IV) No. of project which is be ing done in collaboration  with IIT ’s, its progress 
and financial  implication.  
V) Number of completed project and its proliferation  over IR . 
VI) Periodicity  of Audit  i.e. Annual / Biennial / Triennial , never audited . 
VII) Result  of last Audit . 
VIII) Mid-way/ Terminated project in reference to expenditure  incurred.  
IX) Consultancy  provided/ Undertaken from outside agency . 
X) Earnings  made through consultancy . 
XI) Imprest  Account . 
XII) Procurement  of store , Medicines , Machinery  & Plants . 
XIII) Disposal  of condemned  & Scrap  materials . 
XIV)  Rejected  Materials  and recovery thereof.  
 
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
661 
For internal use of IA&AD  Important Risk  Parameters  of Quality  Assurance  Directorates (Mechanical , 
Civil , S&T ) 
I) Activities  under taken (EOI) to enlist the new  vendor . 
II) Items having less than 3 vendors  or nil vendor  and steps taken by the 
directorate  to develop more vendors   
III) Testing  charges  collected from the vendors . 
IV) Listing , Delisting , Up-gradation , Banning of business etc.  
V) Items inspected by RDSO  and subsequently failed on consignee end.  
VI) Supply  and Warranty  related issues.  
VII) Complaints related to vendors  & its disposal . 
VIII) Product  inspection, collection of Inspection  charges  and issuance of 
Inspection certificate . 
IX) Details of tenders /works  etc. and its review.  
8.  FUNCTIONS AND ROLES OF THE DIRECTORATES  
8.1 Carriage  
Carriage  Directorate is engaged in the development  of new  designs / 
specifications  and up -gradation/ standardization  of the existing designs/ 
specifications  of passenger  coaches  and its sub -systems.   The main activities of 
the carriage directorate  are: 
I) Develop key drawings  and specifications  of new designs  of coaching  
stock . 
II) Validation of design  by tests and trials  along with PUs  and testing  
directorate  of RDSO . 
III) Co-ordination  with PUs  and user railways in the area of failure  
investigation, design  modification  etc. 
IV) Standardization  of design  between RDSO  and two PUs . 
V) Development  of new  advanced materials  for coach  interiors  
VI) Formulation of maintenance  instructions  of sub -assemblies  like couplers , 
air-brake  system , roller bearings etc.  
VII) Statutory  clearance for operation  of new  rolling stock   
VIII) Vendor  development  of safety  items  
IX) Optimization of suspension  parameters for all types of rolling stock  using 
vehicle  dynamic s simulation  software , NUCARS  and ADAMS RAIL  
X) Computer  wing undertakes  high end design  activities like finite element 
analy sis, vehicle  dynamics simulation , crash analysis  etc. 
XI) Enhancing fire  safety  of trains . 
8.2 Engine  Development  & Urban Transport & High  Speed  (UTHS ) 
Engine  Development  Directorate  is engaged in improvement in Railway  Diesel  
Engine technolog y with following missions;  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
662 
For internal use of IA&AD  I) Development  of emission compliant diesel engine  technology   
II) Better Fuel  efficiency   
III) Development  of Alter nate Fuels  and appropriate/Contemporary 
technology  
Main activities of this Directorate  are as under - 
a) Nodal  directorate  for approvals  of Metro  Systems  related issues. 
Centralized  documentation  of metro technology , designs  & approvals.   
b) Single window in RDSO  for interaction with Metro  
corporations/authority .  
c) Examine design  approvals /design issues/technical  issues/trials  & 
forward approvals. If necessary, would seek internal  
approvals/consultations with respective design directorates.  
d) Co-ordinating  directorates for issue  of speed  certificates & conducting 
oscillation  trials . 
e) Stock /Track/Signal /Electrical  equipment  validations tests. 
Assimilation  of urban transport  technology  alternatives (skybus, 
monorail , metro).  
f) Develop knowledge  expertise in urban transport  solutions & take up 
consultancies for the same.  
g) Nodal  directorate  to develop as knowledge  base fo r high  speed  
operations .  
h) Inputs to develop a high  speed  corridor at the RDSO  test track , under 
development  in Jodhpur Divisio n of NWR . Identifying specific 
factors/technology  (cab Signalling , remote track  sensing, track  
maintenance , Rolling  stock  maintenance ) defining the safety  of high  
speed  operations / high  speed  corridors . 
8.3 Motive Power  
Motive Power  Directorate  is engaged in designs  and standard works  related with 
diesel -electric  and diesel -hydraulic  locomotives . The main activities of the 
directorate  are as under:  
I) Development  and standardization  of locomotive  systems, spares / 
components  and sub-assemblies .  
II) Technical  investigation into operational  and maintenance  problems of 
Railways .  
III) Providing technical  consultancy  to Railway  Management  and other 
Public  Sector  Undertakings  in matters connected with Diesel  Traction .  
IV) Acquisition  & assimilation  of state -of-the-art technology  in the field of 
diesel locomotives  and accident  management  equipment , e.g. 5500/6000 
HP locomotive , 140 T Break down  Crane .  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
663 
For internal use of IA&AD  V) Development  and indigenization  of locomotive  equipment  / spares  / 
components .  
VI) Nodal  directorate  for issue  of speed  certificates for all types of rolling 
stock . 
VII) Design  development  of locomotives , diesel rail  cars, diesel hydraulic 
multiple unit , Diesel  electric  multiple unit , Rail  buses , Breakdown  cranes 
etc. 
VIII) Providing technical  consultancy  to Railway  Board  
8.4 Electrical  Directorate  and Power  Supply  and Electrical Multiple  Unit  (PS & 
EMU )  
The functions  of the Electrical  Directorate  include design  and development  of 
different kinds of electric  locomotives  and their equipment  keeping pace with the 
changing technologies  and need of the t imes, guiding the Zonal  
Railways /Production  Units  with regard to problems experienced by them in the 
maintenance  and operation  of electric  locomotives  and their equipment , acting as 
a pivot , between Railway  Board  and Zonal Railways in all technical  matters 
pertaining to the performanc e of electric  locomotives  over Indian  Railways . 
The role of the Electrical  Directorate  is primarily to design  and develop new  
locomotives  and equipment  with modern technologies  and also to assist the 
ZRs/PUs  in improving the reliability, keeping the maintenance  requirements of 
the locomotives  to minimum and act as the technical  advisor to Railway  Board .  
A wing of Electrical Directorate  also undertakes  inspection of various electrical 
and mechanical equipment  pertaining to rolling stock  at Bhopal and Jhansi units  
of Bharat  Heavy Electricals Limited . 
It also deals with service  related technical  problems, including standardization , 
indigenization  of technology /sub-systems through industry  and quality  
control /vendor  base of vital items of Electric  Locomotive  assigned to RDSO  by 
Railway  Board . Work also includes e valuation  of new  technologies  and up 
gradation of product for higher performance , reliability and economies  in 
operation .  
Power  Suppl y and EMU  Directorate  is engaged in developing design  and 
standardization  of electrical equipment  and systems of Electric  Multiple  Units , 
Metro  Rolling  Stock , Train  Lighting, Air  Conditioning and Power Supply related 
items of coaches  and development  of initial vendors  for these items, with a view 
to achieve the quality  objectives  for improved suburban and main line services to 
railway  passengers in terms of better comfort, safety , reliability and efficiency . 
8.5 Research  
Research  Directorate  of RDSO  performs the following activities - 
I) Conducting Governing  Council  Meeting (GCM ) 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
664 
For internal use of IA&AD  II) Coordination  activities for the meetings of Governing  Council  (GCM ) 
and Central  Board  of Railway  Researc h (CBRR)  
III) Maintenance  of Oscillation Monitoring  System  (OMS ) of Indian  
Railways  
IV) Conducting Central  Board  of Rail way Research  (CBRR) Meetings  
V) Coordinating for MOU  with IITs  and different Directorate  of RDSO  for 
R&D  projects  for multi -disciplinary na ture. 
VI) Coordinating with IIT /Kharagpur in establishment of Centre  for Railway  
Research  
VII) Other consultancy  projects  with IITs /Foreign  institutions  
VIII) Instrumentation support  for field trials  to various RDSO  directorates.  
IX) Monitoring  of Technology  Mission  on Railway  Safety  Projects  
X) Monitoring  of Technological  Mission  of Indian  Railways  (TMIR)  
XI) R&D  projects  of mult i-disciplinary nature  
XII) Coordination  with foreign  institutions .  
8.6 Signal  
The main activities of the Signal  directorate  are as under - 
I) Design , development  & Standardization  of Signalling  & Safety  
equipment .  
II) Adaptation  & absorption  of emerging software  embedded technologies .  
III) Investigation , analysis  & remedial  measures  of specific field problems 
referred by Zonal  Railways  / Railways Board .  
IV) Improving reliability of signalling  equipment .  
V) Providing technical  assistance/guidance  to Zonal  Railways .  
VI) Vendor  development  for development  items.  
VII) Testing  of signalling  items for vendor  development  & investigation.  
VIII) Issue, review & revision  of specifications , Test formats & STRs.  
IX) Issue of Pre -Commissioning Check  Lists for vital signalling  equipment  
8.7 Traction  Installation  
Traction  Installation (TI) Directorate   is engaged in design , development , 
standardization  and introduction of appropriate technology  for equipment  related 
to Traction Power  Distribution (TrD ) system  for electric  rolling stock . The 
Directorate is involved in evolving designs  & standards  to improve the re liability 
& availability of Tr D. system .  
The main activities of the directorate  are as under - 
a) Design , development  & standardization  of equipment , systems used 
for 25 KV A.C.  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
665 
For internal use of IA&AD  b) Design , development  & standardization  of equipment  used 2x25 
KV  A.C. Traction  system , Traction Sub -Stations  and Over  Head  
Lines.  
c) Design , development  & standardization  of equipment  used for DC 
traction  system  for Kolkata  Metro  applications . 
d) Safety  studies of Metros  being constructed under Metro  Act. 
e) Design  and s tandardization  of Grid Substations.  
f) Providing technical  consultancy  to Railways  and other private  
agencies in matters connected with Traction  Installations.  
8.8 Track  Design  
Main functions  of directorate  are Research , Design  and Development  of Rails , 
Welding  Technology , Sleepers , Fastenings, Turnouts, Long Welded Rails, 
Ultrasonic  testing  etc. The Track  Design Directorate  also provides consultancy  to 
Zonal  Railways  on the matters pertaining to track  Development and 
standardization  of new  innovations reported by the Railways. The main strength  
of Track Design Directorate is its capability to develop, evaluate and manage 
design , drawings  and specifications  besides standardization  of new  track  
components  for Indian  Railways . Design and development  in diverse areas such 
as rail  technology , rail  flaw detection , points and crossings , switch expansion 
joints, concrete sleepers, track  fastenings , rail  welding, rail  stress calculation, 
design of fixed stru cture gauge , clearance of new  rolling stock  etc. 
8.9 Testing  
Testing  Directorate  undertakes  design  validations of all newl y designed/ 
modified rolling stock  developed in -house or imported , employing the latest 
state-of-the-art data acquisition  and analysis  tools  and techniques .  Besides 
undertaking actual field trials , this directorate  has three laboratories  for 
conducting stationery tests as well.  Testing Directorate  has also been entrusted  
with carrying out periodic track  monitoring  runs on Rajdhani  and Shatabdi  routes .  
Laboratory  Tests are co nducted on newly designed sub -assemblies  and Rolling  
Stocks  components  as well as quality  audit  check for assessing the suitability by 
simulating  service  condition/field condition in three well equipped and 
modernized laboratories . Whenever a railway  vehicle  undergoes any 
modification  or a new  vehicle design is sought to be introduced, field trials  are 
mandatory before the Commissioner  of Railway  Safety  who permits their 
introduction into the Railway system . Laboratory tests are conducted in three well 
equipped and modernized laboratories viz. Air  Brake Lab , Brake Dynamometer  
Lab and Fatigue  testing  lab. 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
666 
For internal use of IA&AD  8.10 Telecommunication  
Telecom Directorate  is engaged in the task of development  and standardization  
of telecom  equipment /systems for use on Indian  Railways .  The main functions  
of the directorate  are as under - 
I) Design  and development  of modern telecom  equipment  
II) Standardization  of telecom  equipment  and systems  
III) Adaption  & Absorption  of emerging technologies  
IV) Improving reliability of existing equipment  
V) Providing technical  guidance  to Zonal  Railways  
VI) Investigating field problems referred by Zonal  Railways /Railway  Board  
VII) Issuing installation and maintenance  manuals  & codes  of practice  
VIII) Laying QA standards  for equipment  manufacturers & conducting quality  
audit  
IX) Vendor  developmentto ensure supply  of quality  material  and equipment  
to Railways  
X) Testing  and inspection of telecom  equipment  
XI) Development  of new  products and their specification, specific to the need 
of Indian  Railways  
XII) Installation and maintenance  of Telecom  assets  of RDSO . 
8.11 Track  Machines  and Monitoring  
The main functions  of the directorate  are as under - 
I) Track  Monitoring  by Track Recording Cars  including up -gradation and 
development  of recording system , Testing  of Track components  like 
Sleepers , Fastenings, welds etc. in Track Lab , Preparation  of Track 
Machine  Manual , Maintenance  instructions  and Guidelines  like, List  of 
critical Spare Parts, Inspection -Checklists, Maintenance Schedule  
Manuals , Revision  of specifications , Indigenization  of Spare parts etc. for 
Large Track Machine, Development  and Standardization  of Small Track 
Machines .  
II) Study and testing  of different track  components  in simulated dynamic 
conditions for assessment  of their service  life and properties  
III) Conducting field trials  
IV) Development , standardization  and adoption of small track  machines  and 
P.Way measuring tools  including approval  of their manufacturing 
sources.  
V) Adoption  of large track  machines  on Indian  Railways  and improving their 
mainta inability and reliability in the field in a cost  effective manner.  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
667 
For internal use of IA&AD  8.12 Traffic  
Traffic Directorate  gives opinion/advice to all the technical  directorates of RDSO  
being user di rectorate . It gathers users’ requirements through market surveys , 
future projections , customer  feedbacks, literature survey  and by other available 
means and apprises th e same to the concerned technical  directorates of RDSO for 
improvement in various railway  designs . This directorate  interacts with its 
counter parts for evolving suitable future designs of coaches  and wagon  etc. to 
meet the increasing demands of traffic  and undertakes  studies pertaining to traffic  
and commercial  discipline. Traffic director ate conducts feasibilities studies 
pertaining to Operating  and Commercial  departments  in respect of increasing 
efficiency  line capacity, enhancing safety  in train operations  and improving the 
image of the organization  in the eyes of the users leading to ultimate customer  
delight.  
8.13 Wagon  
Wagon  Directorate  is engaged in design  and development  of Freight Stock  and 
its components  according to the customer  requirements.  Objective  of this 
director ate is to design freight  wagons  and their related components . The wagon  
directorate also renders consultancy  to industry  on special  wagons  for 
manufacturers executing export order. Wagon Directorate is the nodal agency  of 
IR for all design and technical  issues related to freight  stock . 
  Its main functions  are: 
I) Design  and development  of wagons  to cater requirement of industry . 
II) Formulating maintenance  instructions  for wagons . 
III) Redressal  of manufacturing and maintenance  issues related to wagons . 
IV) Nodal  agency  for issue  of speed  certificate  for wagons . 
V) Organizing oscillation trials  of wagons  
VI) Approval  of wagon  design  of private  parties.  
VII) Vender Approval  of W eigh Bridge  suppliers  and items controlled by 
Directorate  
VIII) Model  Approval  of Tippler  
IX) Design  and development  of freight  stock  and its components  and sub -
assemblies  
X) Standardization  of freight  stock  and its sub -assemblies . 
XI) Technical  investigation into operational  and maintenance  problems of 
Railways  
XII) Providing technical  consultancy  to Railway  Management  and other 
Public  Sector  Undertakings  in matter connected with freight  stock  
XIII) Acquisition  and assimilation  of state -of-the-art technology  in the field of 
freight  stock  
XIV)  Indigenization  of freight  stock  components  and sub -assemblies  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
668 
For internal use of IA&AD  XV) Provide consultancy  services to industry  for design  and manufacture of 
special  purpose wagons  required for movement of special  consignments  
XVI)  Provide technical  services to Indian  manufacturers executing export 
orders.  
8.14 Bridges  and Structures  
The main functions  of the Bridge  and Structures  directorate  are as under - 
I) Evolving new  standard designs  of bridges  (Steel , RCC, PSC and 
Composite etc.) for the latest loading  standards  
II) Development  of new  loading  standards  as per the needs of Indian  
Railways  
III) Speed  clearance of new  rolling sto cks and locomotive  for permitting its 
use on existing bridges  
IV) Design  of platform shelters, microwave  towers  and other structures  of 
standard nat ure. 
V) Formulation, updation and revision  of Code  of practices for the Design  of 
Steel /RCC/PSC and Arch Bridges  as well as sub -structure  
VI) Investigation  and rehabi litation  schemes of old bridges  for running  of 
heavier trains  
VII) Inspection  of welded plate girders  and open web  girders  durin g their 
fabrication  for use on the railways  
VIII) Study of structural  characteristics of bridge  girders .  Effect on bridges  due 
to train load including longitudinal  forces.  
IX) Field trials  and laboratory  tests for validation of existing provisions and 
evolving new  criteria  for design  and strength  assessment  techniques . 
X) Preparation  of manuals  and guidelines  on aspects related to inspection and 
maintenance  of bridges . 
XI) Study of bridge  hydraulics , scour and river training  works  
XII) Represent Indian  Railways  in various committees of Bureau  of Indian 
Standards  and Indian Road  Congress . 
XIII) Rendering consultancy  services to the Zonal  Railways  concerning bridge  
structures  in gauge  conversion  project.  
XIV)  In house software  development  for analysis  and design  of bridges  and 
other structures . 
XV) Proof checking of designs  and bridg es submitted by consultants through 
Zonal  Railways . 
XVI)  Developing list of competent manufacturers of girder  bridges  and 
bearings.  
XVII)  Preparation  and updating of all  codes , manuals  and specifications  for 
design , construction  and maintenance  of bridges  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
669 
For internal use of IA&AD  8.15 Geo-Technical  Enginee ring 
Geo-technical  Engineering  Directorate  deals with Geo -technical  Engineering 
matters of Indian  Railways . It has well equipped  laboratory  with all conventional 
and latest modern soil  testing  facilities. Main functions  of the directorate  are as 
follows: -  
I) Advise on matters concerning Geotechnical  Engineering  to Indian  
Railways   
II) Framing and updating Guidelines /Manuals /Specifications for Earthwork , 
Ballast  and Tunnels .  
III) Super check of earthwork  in new  constructions , as and when directed by 
Railway  Board .  
IV) Consultancy  on Geo -technical  Engineering  problems to various Zonal  
Railways .  
V) Training of Railway  personnel in Geotechnical  Engineering .  
VI) Applied Research  in Geotechnical  Engineering .  
VII) Adoption  of new  products/technologies  pertaining to Geo -technical  
Engineering  
VIII) Monitorin g quality  and progress of Formation Rehabilitation  
IX) Overseeing the function of GE organization  of Railways  
8.16 Metallurgical  and Chemical  
Metall urgical  and Chemical  Directorate  are involved in the development  of 
suitable materials  as metals, non -metals, welding consumables , rubber, plastic, 
composite, anticorrosive coatings and lubricants .  In addition, development  work  
in respect of non -destructive testing  of critical rolling stock  and Permanen t way 
components , reconditioning  of work -out components , failure  investigation of 
critical components  and studies into fatigue  and fracture behaviour of materials  
is also carried out. All Metallurgical and Chemical testing  and investigation of 
failed components  in respect of track , rolling stock  etc. is done by this directorate . 
Nature of Work  
a) Testing  of paints based on Alkyd, Epoxy and PU based paint  for 
establishing the validity of specifications  framed  by M&C directorate . 
b) Testing  of paint  samples forwarded by QA directorate  in connection 
with Vendor  approval /re-approval . 
c) Testing  of paint  samples forwarded by QA directorate  in connection 
with Quality  Audit  of paint  firms  
d) Corrosion  studies of various Railway  Material   related to Rail  Track . 
 
 
 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
670 
For internal use of IA&AD  Portion, Equipment  & Technology  Development  
a) USFD , Hardness, Load Deflection, Macro  Examination  in co -
ordination  with Thermit  Portion Plant  (TPP )/ Charbagh, Lucknow  
b) Chemical  Analysis  in co -ordination  with Investigation  Section  
All the equipment  testing  is carried out like preheating torch, compressors , weld  
trimmer  in co -ordination  with TPP , Charbagh, and Corrosion  Engg.  Lab.  
8.17 Psycho -Technical  
Psycho -Technical  Unit is instrumental  in deve lopment  and standardization  of 
behavioral intervention programmes and their implementation  earnestly 
addressing the safety  concern of Indian  Railways . The focus of the directorate  is 
on job analysis , motivation, stress management , safety supervision, counseling 
and ergonomic appraisal  of tools  and work  places. Main objectives  of the 
directorate  are to increase job performance , job satisfaction and motivation of 
employees  as well as prevention of accidents  due to human lapses.  Main 
activities of Psycho -Technical Directorate  are as follows:  
I) Scientific job analysis  
II) Development  and standardization  of aptitude tests  
III) Estimation  of training  needs of employees ’ and providing guidelines  for 
development  of training  programme  
IV) Research  on proble ms related to organizational behaviours  
V) Development  and implementation  of programmes for stress reduction  
8.18 Works  
Works  directorate  started functioning independen tly from September 2008. 
Works directorate  is dealing with unification and standardization  of works  matter, 
issue  guidelines /specification of works  matter. Works directorate  conducts 
Works Standard  Committee  meeting and follow up  action  on Works Standard 
Committee items and other technical  issues cro pping up from time  to time , 
through unit  of Director /Works. Works directorate  is also responsible for 
maintenance  of RDSO  offices, colony  & other infrastructural assets  including 
construction  of new  assets  and preparation of works  Programme  through unit  of 
Director/Civil . 
8.19 Administration -I & II  
Administration -I is headed by Executive  Director /Administration -I. Electrical  
Maintenance  Section  carries out all functions  related to Electrical Maintenance 
Section, Central  Library , Publication  and Public Relation in RDSO . He functions 
as Chief  Public Relations Officer (CPRO ) of RDSO for public  relation work .  
Executive  Director /Admn. -II is in -charge of all functions  related to 
Administration  Branch , Complaint/Suggestion web  portal , Research  and Design  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
671 
For internal use of IA&AD  (R&D ) Section , Misc . Advances , Training Section &  RTI Section in RDSO . He 
functions as Chief  Public  Information  Officer (CPIO) of RDSO in relation to RTI 
cases and liaison work  of Associations & Societies.  
8.20 Quality  Assurance  – Mechanical  – QA-I 
Quality  Assurance  (Mechanical ) Directorate  deals with vendor  development  
(Multi-sourcing), Inspection  of items for wagon , carriage & locomotives  and 
inspection of wagons  manufactured at Wagon  builders’ premises. Quality Audit  
of Railway  units  such as workshops , depots  etc. is also being done on regular 
basis. Main functions  of this directorate  are as under;  
I) Inspection  of wagons  against orders by Railway  Board  & private  
organizations   
II) Inspection  of safety  items for Indian  Railways  & also for private  
organizations  having bearing on safety of train running   
III) Facilitating Indian  Railways  by making available Vendor  Directory for 
critical & safety  items/subassemblies  
IV) Biannual  issuance of Vendor  Directory, covering items dealt by QA, 
Motive Power , Wagon , carriage & M&C Directorate .  
V) Quality  audit  of Railway  Units .  
8.21 Quality  Assurance -II (Civil ) 
The main Activities  of Directorate  are as under:  
Multi  sourcing and Vendor  development  for Specified Items – Fresh approval  of 
Vendors – Re-assessment  and Re -Certification of approved Vendors – Up 
gradation/ Down gradation of Vendors –Publication  of Master  list of approved 
Vendors & its updation. – Assessment of Production  capacity of vendors . 
Concrete Sleeper  Plants  – Development  of New  Concrete Sleeper Plants  – 
Development of existing Concrete Sleeper Plants for manufacture of Special 
Sleepers  – Oversight  Inspection  of concrete Sleeper Plants Quality  checks  on 
Materials  supplied at Consignee  end for ERC , GRSP , GFN  and metal liners. 
Purchase  Inspection of Five Safety  critical P -Way Items Viz. CMS  Crossings , 
Grooved  Rubber sole Plates, Glass filled Nylon Liners, HDPE Dowels and AT 
Welding  Portio ns. Up gradation of Schedule  of Technical  Requirements (STRs) 
& Quality Assurance  Plans (QAPs) Training of Zonal  Railway  Officers for 
inspection of P -way components  as required.  
8.22 Quality  Assurance -III  (S&T ) 
The primary objective  of Quality  Assurance  (S&T ) Directorate  is Deve lopment  
and Registration of vendors  for supply  of important signalling  and 
telecommunication equipment  and ensuring quality  of the equipment  
through  inspection of material  at firm’s premises & periodic quality  audits.  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
672 
For internal use of IA&AD  8.23 Stores  
Stores  Directorate  caters to various materials  requirements  for RDSO , including 
advisory rule on matters pertaining to Stores.  It has two wings viz. Purchase  and 
Depot . Purchase wing deals with approximately 1500 demands/ annum, 
pertaining to items of civil maintenance , telecom  maintenance  and electrical 
maintenance  to items ranging from stationery, computers, clothing, furniture, 
paints, oils, lubricants , tools  and plants, small equipment , spares  of machines  and 
also of complex R&D  items involving imports as well. Depot wing consists of 
four stocking  wards, stocking  and issuing about 500 items having annual  turnover  
valve of Rs. 3 crore.  In addition, there is a receipt  and inspection ward and a 
scrap  clearance section .  All unwanted material  is handed over to NR scrap  depot / 
Alambagh, as the nodal scrap  disposal  centre. The directorate  is ISO  9001 -2008 
& achieved 100% e -tendering  for Global , Open  and Limited  tender  through 
IREPS  portal . 
8.24 Finance  and Accounts  
 The Finance  and Accounts  Directorate  is headed by Principal  Executive  Director . 
The main activities undertaken by this Directorate are as under:  
I) Compilation  of accounts  (General  & Subsidiary  Books ) and maintenance  
of ledgers  of the organization  as per scheduled laid  down in the codal 
provi sions/Railway  Board  guidelines .  
II) Disposal  of all bills /claims of Railway  employees  and outsiders 
(Customers) as per schedule laid  down in codal provision/Railway Board  
guidelines  while ensuring that there are no financial  irregularities  in the 
transactions of the railway  through  internal  check/inspection/stock  
verification .  
III) Compilation  of Budgets  Estimates  as per schedule and monitoring  the 
budgetary  control  procedures through monthly  financial  review.  
IV) Revision  of PPO  of retired  employee and timely disbursement  of 
retirement  dues at time  of regular retirement  cases.  
V) Attending to Audit  references  as per schedule laid  down by Railway  
Board .  
VI) Tendering  financial  advice to the administration whenever required 
timely and correctly in all matters involving financial  commitment and 
expenditure .  
VII) Regular  monitori ng of financial  progress of research  project of 
SRESTHA, TMIR, IITs , CRR, Malaviya chair.  
VIII) Advising different directorate  on GST , income  Tax m atter and applicable 
tax rate.  
IX) To organize Customer Satisfaction Camps periodically.  
 
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
673 
For internal use of IA&AD  8.24.1  Chief  Personnel  Officer  
Chief  Personnel  Officer (CPO ) is in -charge of all functions  related to Personnel 
Branch  in RDSO . CPO looks after the following sections : (a) All the Gr. ‘C’ Non 
Gazetted  Sections, Advances , Misc . & Recruitment  Section  looked after by DA -
III. (b) Gr. ‘D’ Non Gazetted  Estt., Salary , Legal  & Pass Sections looked after by 
JDE. (c) Gazetted and Policy  Secti on looked after by DDE -II. (d) Confidential  
Section is dealing with all confidential  matters including posting, transfer of 
Gazetted officers etc. looked after by Assistant  Secretary /Confidential.  
The various Sections are: (1) Establishment -I (2) Establishment -II (3) 
Establishment -III (4) Establishment -IV (5) Establishment -V (Advances  & 
Policy ) (6) Establishment -VI (7) Establis hment -VII (8) Recruitment  Section  (9) 
Legal  Cell (10) Welfare  Section (11) Pass Section (12) Misc . Section  
8.24.2  Chief  Medical  Superintendent  
The extra divisional  hospital  having OPD  and Indoor  Patient Treatment  with 
pathological & Radiology  facilities are situated in the RDSO  campus  and 
extending the medical facilities to the RDSO officers and staff . 
8.24.3  Chief  Security  Commissioner  
Railway  Protection Force (Security ) office was formed in April 2012 vide 
Railway Board  Letter No. 2012/Sec (E)/PO -2/1 dt.30.04.2012 .  Post  of Chief  
Security Commis sioner  was created in 2011.  Chief Security Commissioner is 
head  of Security Directorate  in RDSO .  The main function of O/o the Chief 
Security Commissioner is as under – 
I) To look after the s ecurity of the office buildings  situated at RDSO  and the 
premises of the colony .   
II) Issue of Identity Cards  
III) Provision  of Security  Guards  at barriers in RDSO  
IV) Action under Railway  Act 
V) Action under RP(UP) Act  
8.24.4  Executive  Director  Inspection  & Liaison, Electrical , Bhopal  and Jhansi  
The functions  of the office of the Executive  Director  (Inspection  & Liaison), 
Electrical , Bhopal and Jhansi is limited only to inspection of the BHE L, Bhopal 
and Jhansi and CGL, Bhopal in respect of parts of Electric  Locomotives  and 
Electric Locomotives.  
8.24.5  Centre  for Advanced Maintenance Technology (CAMTECH)/, Gwalior  
The functions  of  of CAMTECH are to upgrade maintenance technologies and 
methodologies and achieve improvement in productivity and performance of all 
railway assets and manpower which inter alia would cover reliability, availability 
for use, utilization and effic iency . CAMTECH carries out in depth studies of 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
674 
For internal use of IA&AD  maintenance problems, identifies and help Zonal Railways to implement possible 
solutions, imparts training, prepares Maintenance Manuals, Handbooks, 
Technical instructions, guidelines, pamph lets, video films for maintenance of all 
four technical departments  of Indian Railways. This literature is made available 
both on the CAMTECH website and in the printed format as well. Dissemination 
of the knowledge and information is do ne by interactive Seminars & Workshops  
organised and coordinated by CAMTECH on various maintenance related 
subjects in association with OEMs, RDSO, Zonal railways and domain experts.  
 
  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
675 
For internal use of IA&AD  Appendix  ‘A’ 
(List  of items to be checked during inspections ) 
List of items to be Checked of Directorate (s)-Carriage , Engine  Development  
& UTHS , Motive Power , Signal , Track  Installation, Track Design , 
Telecommunication, Wagon , Bridges  & Structure, Geo -Technical   and 
M&C.  
I) Attendance  Registe r & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III)  Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of ongoing  Projects . 
VIII) Review of Physical  & Financial  Progress  of projects  carried out by the 
directorate . 
IX) Review of Experimental  works  carried out by Research  Centers.  
X) Register  of Card  Passes  & their movement register . 
XI) Estimates , Completion  Reports  & Expenditure Register  of Projects . 
XII) Review of Vendor  Performance  Monitoring  System . 
XIII) Register  of Machinery  and Plant . 
XIV)  Review of implementation  of successfully completed projects  
XV) Review of midway  closure of projects . 
XVI)  Review of delayed processing of Vendor  cases.  
XVII)  Review of sanctioned  strength  & Persons in position.  
XVIII)  Review of drawings , instrument  register . 
XIX)  Recovery  charges  for consultative  services rendered to outsiders.  
XX) Review of Monthly  Progress  Report . 
XXI)  Review of complaints  receive d from Zonal  Railways , PUS & PSUs  and 
their redressal.  
XXII)  Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XXIII)  Review of MoU  signe d in between Research institutions  & RDSO  for 
research  projects , their implementation  and progress.  
XXIV)  Review of MCDO /PCDO  of the Directorate . 
QA-I (Mechanical ), QA -II(Civil ) & QA -III(S&T ) Directorates.  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  includ ing statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
676 
For internal use of IA&AD  IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of ongoing  Vendor  Registration cases.  
VIII) Review of recently registered vendors . 
IX) Review of Temporary  Delisted , Delisted & outreach delisting cases.  
X) Status of vendors  which whom the business has been banned by the 
competent authority  
XI) Review of relisted  vendors . 
XII) Register  of Card  Passes  & their movement register . 
XIII) Register  of Machinery  and Plant . 
XIV)  Review of sanctioned  strength  & Persons in position.  
XV) Recovery  register  of inspection charges  
XVI)  Review of PMIS  systems.  
XVII)  Review of Monthly  Progress  Report . 
XVIII)  Review of complaints  received from Zonal  Railways , PUs  & PSUs  and 
their redre ssal. 
XIX)  Review of Development  of vendors . 
XX) Review of Expression of interest  for items having less than three 
vendors . 
XXI)  Review of cases of Quality  Audit . 
XXII)  Review o f last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XXIII)  Review of MCDO /PCDO . 
XXIV)  Tour movement Register . 
Power  Supply  & EMU  Directorate  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of 
late attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III)  Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
IV) Review o f important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of ongoing  Projects . 
VIII) Review of Physical  & Financial  Progress  of projects  carried out by the 
directorate . 
IX) Review of Experimental  works  carried out by Research  Centers.  
X) Register  of Card  Passes  & their movement register . 
XI) Estimates , Completion  Reports  & Expenditure Register  of Projects . 
XII) Review of Vendor  Performance  Monitoring  System . 
XIII) Register  of Machinery  and Plant . 
XIV)  Review of implementation  of successfully completed  projects  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
677 
For internal use of IA&AD  XV) Review of  midway  closure of projects . 
XVI)  Review of delayed processing of Vendor  cases.  
XVII)  Review of sanctioned  strength  & Persons in position.  
XVIII)  Review o f drawings , instrument  register . 
XIX)  Recovery  charges  for consultative  services rendered to outsiders.  
XX) Review of Monthly  Progress  Report . 
XXI)  Review of complaints  received from Zonal  Railways , PUS & PSUs  
and their redressal.  
XXII)  Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XXIII)  Review of MoU  signed in between Research institutions  & RDSO  for 
research  projects , their implementation  and progress.  
XXIV)  Review of ongoing  Vendor  Registration cases.  
XXV)  Review of recently registered vendors . 
XXVI)  Review of Temporary  Delisted , Delisted & outreach delisting cases.  
XXVII)  Status o f vendors  which whom the business has been banned by the 
competent authority  
XXVIII)  Review of relisted  vendors . 
XXIX)  Review of complaints  received from Zonal  Railways , PUs  & PSUs  
and their redressal.  
XXX)  Review of Expression of interest  for items having less than three 
vendors . 
XXXI)  Review of cases of Quality  Audit . 
XXXII)  Review of MCDO /PCDO  of the Directorate  
Inspection  & Liaison, Jhansi & Bhopal  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of complaints  received from Zonal  Railways  & PUs  on failure  
of components  supplied by BHEL & CGL.  
VIII) Review of warranty  claims & their repairs . 
IX) Review of inspection of locomotive  manufactured by BHEL.  
X) Stock  sheets  issued by Stock Verification  Branch . 
XI) Review of last Inspection  Report  issue d by Audit  and Accounts . 
XII) Review of MCDO /PCDO . 
 
 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
678 
For internal use of IA&AD  Research  Directorate  
I) Attendance  register  and Casual  Leave  account  including statement of 
late Attendance.  
II) Dead Stock  register . 
III) Salary  and Travelling  Allowance  Bills  including Abse ntee statement.  
IV) Sanctioned  strength  and persons in position.  
V) Review of important files . 
VI) Review the Minutes  of Governing  Council  Meeting (GCM ) & 
implementation  thereof.  
VII) Review the Minutes  of Central  Board  of Railway  Research  (CBRR) 
Meeting & implementation  thereof.  
VIII) Review of  last Inspection  Reports  of Audit  and Accounts . 
IX) Review of MCDO  of ED Research . 
X) Review of on -going  Projects . 
XI) Review of Completed  Projects . 
XII) Review of Projects  pertains to Research  Directorate . 
XIII) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
XIV)  Complaints if any, and its disposal . 
XV) Review of DSR.  
Testing  Directorate  
I) Attendance  register , casual  leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance  
II) Salary  Bills  of Non - Gazetted  Officer including Travelling  Allowance  
Bills..  
III) Check  of Tools  and Plants . 
IV) Dead stock  Register  
V) Index  register  of cases.  
VI) Review of important files . 
VII) Imprest  cash account . 
VIII) Tender /contract  for procurement  o M&P.  
IX) Review of log books  of Fatigue  Testing  Lab. 
X) Review of utilization Oscillograph  car for field trial.  
XI) Study Trial  Reports . 
XII) Review of log book of machines  of Air  Brake lab & brake 
Dynamometer  lab. 
XIII) Contract  for AMC  of Machines . 
XIV)  Review of Breakdown  of machines  resulting of non -conducting of tests.  
XV) System  of recovery of testing  charges  from outsiders.  
XVI)  System  of disposal  of unserviceable/condemned  machines  & plants.  
XVII)  Review of last Inspection  Report  issued by Audit  and Accounts . 
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
679 
For internal use of IA&AD  Track  Machine  & Monitoring  Directorate  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement re gister . 
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of ongoing  Projects . 
VIII) Review of tender /contracts  regarding procurement  of Track  Machines , 
Track Recording Car  and Track recording equipment /system . 
IX) Review of log books  of Track  Recording Cars.  
X) Review of targets  and achievement of Track  Monitoring . 
XI) Review of system  of maintenance  of TMM Directorates equipment . 
XII) Register  of Card  Passes  & their movement register . 
XIII) Register  of Machinery  and Plant . 
XIV)  Review of sanctioned  stren gth & Persons in position.  
XV) Review of drawings , instrument  register . 
XVI)  Review of Monthly  Progress  Report . 
XVII)  Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XVIII)  Review of Log books  of machines  of TMM Labs.  
XIX)  Review of calibration  of machines . 
XX) Review of assets  register . 
XXI)  Review of MCDO /PCDO . 
XXII)  Review of collection/calculation of testing  charges . 
Traffic  Directorate  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III)  Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  regis ter 
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) Review of ongoing  Projects . 
VIII) Review of Physical  & Financial  Progress  of projects  carried out by the 
directorate . 
IX) Review of Experimental  works  carried out by Research  Centers.  
X) Register  of Card  Passes  & their movement register . 
XI) Estimates , Completion  Reports  & Expenditure Register  of Projects . 
XII) Register  of Machinery  and Plant . 
XIII) Review of implementation  of successfully completed projects  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
680 
For internal use of IA&AD  XIV)  Review of  midway  closure of projects . 
XV) Review of sanctioned  strength  & Persons in position . 
XVI)  Recovery  charges  for consultative  services rendered to outsiders.  
XVII)  Review of Monthly  Progress  Report . 
XVIII)  Review of complaints  received fr om Zonal  Railways , PUS & PSUs  and 
their redressal.  
XIX)  Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XX) Review of MoU  signed in  between Research institutions  & RDSO  for 
research  projects , their implementation  and progress.  
XXI)  Review of MCDO /PCDO . 
Psycho -Technical  Directorate  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance . 
II) Salary  Bills  NGOs  including Medical  Attendance  & TA  Bills.  
III) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Dead stock  register  
VI) Imprest  Account . 
VII) PCDO  of ED, Psycho -Tech  
VIII) Review of Calendar  of Workshop  on motivation & Stress Management . 
IX) Review of system  of consultative  services provided to other 
organizations . 
X) Review of recovery of consultative  charges . 
XI) Review of logbook  of the systems in use.  
XII) Review of Machinery  & Plant  Register . 
XIII) Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts .  
Works  Directorate  & Town Engineer  office  
I) Attendance  register , casual  leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance  
II) Salary  Bills  of Non - Gazetted  Officer including Travelling  Allowance  
Bills.  
III) Index  register  of cases  
IV) Review of important files . 
V) Land  case register  and agreements.  
VI) Works  orders.  
VII) Tender /Contracts . 
VIII) Contractor bills . 
IX) Meas urement  Books . 
X) Register  of measurement  books . 
XI) Check  of Tools  and Plants . 
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
681 
For internal use of IA&AD  XII) Dead stock  Register  
XIII) Card  Passes  and their movement Register . 
XIV)  Imprest  cash account . 
XV) Review of last Inspection  Reports  issued by Accounts  and Audit . 
XVI)  Register  of advice notes . 
XVII)  Departmental verification  of Stores . 
XVIII)  Arbitration  cases.  
XIX)  Termination  of contracts . 
XX) Penalties  imposed on contractor in violation of contract  agreement.  
XXI)  Stores  ledgers  and tracing and posting of issue  notes . 
XXII)  Tenders  and contracts  
XXIII)  List of buildings  including leased  accounts . 
XXIV)  Admissibility or otherwise of amenities  provided to Railway  staff 
partic ularly in railway  colonies . 
XXV)  Misc . cash  collections.  
XXVI)  Credit  note book . 
XXVII)  Material  repaired in I.O.W workshop.  
XXVIII)  Review of theft /losses cas es. 
XXIX)  Register  of annual  repairs  to Railway  buildings  particularly in Railway 
colonies  for white washing  programme , petty  repairs  frequency  in 
replacement  of fittings  etc.(Zone Work).  
XXX)  Handing  over notes  of Inspection  of works . 
XXXI)  Accoun tal of trees and sale of green trees.  
XXXII)  Accountal  of nursery including purchase  of manure and tree guards . 
XXXIII)  Purchase  of gamlas and their accountal  
XXXIV)  Review of service  records and leave  accounts  
XXXV)  Review of Last Inspection  Report  issued by Audit  and Accounts . 
XXXVI)  Review of maintenance  work  undertaken by SSEs of Sector -A, B, C, 
service  buildings  and Estate  office . 
Personnel  Branch  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of 
late attendance . 
II) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
III) Review of i mportant files . 
IV) Dead stock  register  
V) Service  Records  and leave  accounts  including fixation  of pay  and 
annual  verification  of service  of pensionable staff . 
VI) Superannuation  list. 
VII) Review of staff  register  including diaries.  
VIII) Recording of penalties  in service  records and system  to ensure posting.  
IX)  Review of special  leave  granted to staff . 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
682 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) Review of leave  reserve.  
XI) Review of justification  of for creation of various posts  in RDSO  
including extension thereof etc.  
XII) Office  Orders regarding actual date of taking over higher duties and 
posting in service  records (General  Review).  
XIII) Posting of sanctioned  leave  and actual leave  period in service  records.  
XIV)  Compliance  of various staff  office orders.  
XV) Review of sanctioned  strength  and men in position.  
XVI)  Cases of rewards  sanctioned  by Railway  Board , DG & ADG for 
meritorious  work . 
XVII)  Office  copies of Salary  Bills  of GOs & NGOs  including TA  Journals . 
XVIII)  Recovery  registers  including recovery of electric  charges  from staff  
especially transferred outside RDSO . 
XIX)  Medical  Attendance  bills of GOs & NGOs . 
XX) Children  Education  Allowance  Bills . 
XXI)  Imprest  Cash  Account  
XXII)  Contingent  Bills . 
XXIII)  Review of Last Inspection  Reports  issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XXIV)  Review Stock  verification  Sheet  issued by ISA  
XXV)  Organization  of monthly , quarterly and annually Hindi programme . 
XXVI)  Publication  of Hindi magazine  and its distribution . 
XXVII)  Disposal  of wearied books , newspaper , Magazine  etc. 
XXVIII)  System  of conducting of exam for departm ental  promotion  of Group  
‘C’ & ‘D’ staff . 
XXIX)  Submission of Indent to RRB  for direct  recruitment . 
XXX)  System  of distribution  of posts  from panel received from RRB . 
XXXI)  Custody of Blank passes /PTOs books . 
XXXII)  Register  of Passes /PTOs issued.  
XXXIII)  Accounts  of Staff  Benefit Fund . 
Administration , I & II Directorate  
I) Stores  ledger  including accounts  of electric  equipment  and M&P items.  
II) Requisitions  of issue  notes  of stores . 
III) System  of issue  of stores . 
IV) Electricity purchase  bills. 
V) System  of periodical  verification  of electrical fittings  in service  buildings  
and residential  buildings . 
VI) Sanction  for hiring of ACs, Geyser & other electrical equipment  by the 
officers & staff . 
VII) Review revision  of Electricity charges . 
VIII) Bills  for recovery of electric  charges  from Railway  staff and outsiders.  
IX) Sanction  Strength  and On Roll position.  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
683 
For internal use of IA&AD  X) Repair and maintenance  of pump houses.  
XI) Review of Tender /Contracts . 
XII) Check  of Ledgers  of released electrical items & its disposal . 
XIII) Check  of condemned  electrical equipment  & its disposal . 
XIV)  Roster  of Electrical  Maintenance  staff. 
XV) Night Duty  Allowance . 
XVI)  Sanction  of Temporary  Electric  Connections & syst em of recovery of its 
charges . 
XVII)  Check  of consumable  electrical items ledgers . 
XVIII)  Losses & Theft  cases.  
XIX)  Advice  Notes  of Returned Store . 
Store Directorate  
I) Attendance  Register  & Casual  Leave  account  including statement of 
late attendance . 
II) Index  Register  of cases including file  movement register . 
III) Review of important files . 
IV) Dead stock  register  
V) Sanctioned  strength   
VI) Imprest  Account   
VII) Tool  and  Plant  account  
VIII) Card  Passes  and movement register .  
IX) Misc . Cash  colle ctions  
X) Depot  statistics/ narrative report  
XI) Local  purchase  of stores  
XII) Tenders  and contracts  
XIII) Review of acceptance of tenders  
XIV)  Review of Risk  Purchases  
XV) Register  of Defaulting firms.   
XVI)  Purchase  Orders.  
XVII)  Review of Purchases  of stock  items.  
XVIII)  Review of rejection  register . 
XIX)  System  of Receipt, Custody of stores . 
XX) System  of distribution  of stores     
XXI)  Accountal  of vouchers  of Miscellaneous  receipts  
XXII)  Accountal , custody and disposal  of scrap  materials  
XXIII)   Losses, pilferage   etc. written off under sanction of competent 
authority  
XXIV)   Review of Sto ck Verification  Sheets  
XXV)   Incidence of theft  or fire , if any.  
XXVI)   Action taken on differences brought out as a result of stock  
verification  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
684 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXVII)   Ground rent  register . 
XXVIII)  Local  purchase  of stores  
XXIX)  Acknowledgement of stores  received or issued by the parties 
concerned  
XXX)  Accountal , custody and disposal  of scrap  materials   
XXXI)  Breakages  etc. written off under sanction of competent authority   
XXXII)  System  of posting receipts  and issue  in ledgers   
XXXIII)  Review of last Inspection  Report  issued by Audit  and Accounts   
XXXIV)  Register  of rejection  stores  and rejection  Memo   
XXXV)  Credit  Notes   
XXXVI)  Ground Rent  Register  
XXXVII)  Register  of test charges  
XXXVIII)  Review of important cases  
Medical  Branch  
I) Attendance  register , casual  leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance  
II) Salary  Bills  of Non - Gazetted  Officer including Travelling  Allowance  
Bills..  
III) Check  of Tools  and Plants  and equipment . 
IV) Dead stock  Register  
V) PCDO  of CMS . 
VI) Review of important files . 
VII) Imprest  cash account . 
VIII) Diet Charges  and Register  of Indoor  Patient.  
IX) Tender /contract  for washing  of linen . 
X) Sanctioned  Strength  & on Roll position.  
XI) Tender /Contracts  of outsourcing  of Ambulances . 
XII) Outsourcing  of Staff  Nurses, Ward  boy & other staff . 
XIII) Roster  of Doctors , Nurses, Pharmacists  & Ward  Boys etc.  
XIV)  Check  of X-ray films account . 
XV) Check  of Chemical  accounts  of Pathology . 
XVI)  Register  of Pathology  tests viz. Blood, Urine.  
XVII)  Register  of Outdoor  patients both employees  & outsiders.  
XVIII)  Procurement  of medicines  in bulk.  
XIX)  Local  Purchase  of Medicines . 
XX) Contra ct for supply  of local  purchase  of medicines . 
XXI)  Check  of ledger  of medicines . 
XXII)  Ledger  of Linens . 
XXIII)  Ledg er of Consumables  items.  
XXIV)  System  of disposal  of clinical & hazardous waste . 
XXV)  Visitors complaint  Book.  
Chapter 21 –Research Designs & Standards Organization  
 
685 
For internal use of IA&AD  XXVI)  Sanctions  to write off  expired dated medicines  including losses due to 
theft, leakage and breakage etc.  
XXVII)  Honorary  Consultant  Register , if any.  
XXVIII)  Check  of medical re -imbursements  Bills . 
XXIX)  Review of last Inspection  Report  issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
Security (RPF ) Branch  
I) Attendance  register , casual  leave  account  including statement of late  
attendance  
II) Salary  Bills  of Non - Gazetted  Offic er including Travelling  Allowance  
Bills..  
III) Check  of Tools  and Plants . 
IV) Dead stock  Register  
V) Index  register  of ca ses. 
VI) Review of important files . 
VII) Check  of Service  Records . 
VIII) Fixation  of pay  and arrears  of re-fixation , if any.  
IX) Tools  & Plant Register . 
X) Register  of Arm  & Ammunitions . 
XI) List of Books  and Periodicals  purchased from contingency . 
XII) Reward s payment of watch & ward staff . 
XIII) Tender /Contracts  for outsourcing  of Private  Security  Agencies.  
XIV)  System  of Deployment  of staff  of Private  Security  Agency  and RPF  
Staff . 
XV) Review of RPF  Band Account . 
XVI)  Review of Night Duty  Allowance . 
XVII)  Review of Diet  Allowance  & Uniform  Allowance.  
XVIII)  Review of Court Cases.  
XIX)  Register  of Gate  Passes . 
XX) Register  of Periodical  Medical  of RPF  Staff . 
XXI)  Review of last Inspection  Report  Issued by Audit  & Accounts . 
XXII)  Penalties  imposed & implemented on defaulting  staff by Competent  
Authority  
  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
686 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
687 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 Chapter 22  - e-Office  
1. INTRODUCTION  
In October 201884, the Ministry  of Railways  decided to implement e -Office , 
developed by National  Informatics  Centre  (NIC ), over Indian  Railways  by using 
RailNet network , as part of digital  initiative and to go paperless  in the office 
working for improving transparency and efficiency .  Accordingly, the Ministry 
of Railways (Railw ay Board ) executed a Memorandum  of Understanding (MoU ) 
on 8th March 2019  with RailTel Corp oration  of India  Ltd. for implementation  of 
‘e-Office ’ project over Indian Railways.  
2 e-OFFICE  
e-Office  product suite, initiated in the year 2009, is a work  flow based file  system  
developed by National  Informatics  Center (NIC ).  eOffice is a digital  workplace 
solution with a vision  to achieve a simp lified  and transparent  paperless  working in 
offices . The components  of e-Office are as under85:- 
I) File Management  System  (eFile ) 
II) Personnel  Information  Management  System  (PIMS ) 
III) Knowledge  Management  System  (KMS ) 
IV) Leave  Management  System  (eLeave)  
V) Tour  Management  System  (eTour ) 
VI) Collaboration  and Messaging service  (CAMS ) 
VII) Smart Performance  Appraisal  Report  Recording Online  Window  
(SPARROW ) 
At present, File  Management  System  (eFile ) and SPARROW  components86 are 
under implementation  over Indian  Railways . The rest  of the components  of e-
Office  developed by National  Informatics  Centre , may be implemented by the 
Railway  Administration  in due course of time .  An ove rview of these modules  
with brief of the  functionalities covered  under each of them is given below87:- 
2.1   File Management  System  (eFile ) 
eFile  is a workflow -based computer  system  that s imulates the manual  system  in a 
digital  environment.  The system  comprises  different  sub modules  that are inter-
linked  to manage     the official work  flow of  the entire life cycle  of a document/dak from 
the moment  it is received by the Railway  Administration  till the time  it is disposed 
                                                           
84 Ministry  of Railways  letter NO. E(G)/2017/Misc /Status of AEBAS dated 04.10 .2018  and 24.01.2019  
85 Source : https://eoffice.gov.in  
86 http://www.reis.railnet .gov.in  
87 Actual functionalities of the modules  yet to be implemented will depend upon the original/modified version of 
these modules  which is implemente d by the Railway  Administration . 
Chapter 22 –e-Office  
 
688 
For internal use of IA&AD  of with the proper set of actions. It involves all stages o f working in a file , including 
the scanning,  diarisation  of inward  receipts , creation  of files, movement  of 
receipts /files  and finally , the closing  of files/receipts . A brief of different modules  
of eFile system  and functions  facilitated by them are as under: - 
2.1.1 Receipt  
The Receipt  module  facilitates diarizing of letters/paper (Dak) received in 
physical  form88 and electronic  form (received through linked email account ), 
generating a unique  diary/receipt  number for each receipt, for warding the 
letters/papers (Dak etc.) to the intending person/official(s) (i.e. Reporting officer, 
Sub-ordinate, any other person etc.), generating and dispatching 
acknowledgement  of the receipt to the sender. The module facilitates  
putting/attaching the receipt in a file , closing the receipt, dispatching the receipt89, 
tracking the movement of the receipt etc.  
2.1.2 Files  
A file  is a collection of re lated records which comprises  Receipts , Noting , Draft , 
References and linked files .  The Files  sub-module  facilitates, among other 
things, creation of files , preparation and submission of Noting. attachi ng files  
with the Noting side, attaching/detaching receipt /correspondence to the working 
file, creation of draft, forwarding/submission of noting/draft to different level of 
officials in the hierarchy  for approval /finalization. The module also facilitates 
linking /delinking  internal /external files , tracking movement of running  file (i.e. 
details of all the users who have worked on it), creating a part/volume file  of an 
existing file , digitally signing noting/drafting, parking90/un-parking file , 
closing/re -opening of file  etc. 
2.1.3 Migrate  
Migrate  sub-module  facilitates migration of old files  from local  system  to e-file 
system . 
2.1.4 Despatch  
Despatch  sub-module  helps the user to view the issues that have been dispatched 
to concerned recipients.  
2.1.5 DSC  
DSC  Sub-module  facilitates registration  of DSC/e -Token issued to them by 
Certifica te Issuing Authorities like TCS , NIC  etc. 
 
                                                           
88 by uploading the scanned copies of the letters/papers etc. received in physical  form  
89 The process of issuing an official reply to the concerned sender.  
90 Parking  means temporarily storing the files  which are currently not in use but can be used later.  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
689 
For internal use of IA&AD  2.1.6 Settings  
Setting s sub-module  facilitates creation of Group  under Address Book which help  
s the users while diarizing of receipts , creation of User group which helps while 
sending a Receipt /File to list of selected users, deactivation of DSC , transfer of 
employees /file etc. 
2.1.7 Search  & Advance  Search Facility  
Search /Advance  Search facilitates to find relevant information/record pertaining 
to the part (sub -module ) of the e -file system ,  Files , Receipts , Dispatches using 
multiple  parameters91.  
2.1.8 Report   
Report  sub-module  generates a large number of reports , dependi ng upon the 
parameters  used. F ew of the reports, which may be useful to an Auditor , and can 
be saved in pdf format, are as under: - 
I) Files  Register  Report  containing details of the files  generated withi n a 
specific period  
II) Report  containing list of files  forwarded/Received/Parked/Closed during 
a specific period  
III) Receipt  Diary Report  containing details of all the receipts  
Diarized /Forwarded/Closed within a specific period  
IV) Report  containing department wise summary of Receipts  and Files  
created, received, sent, parked (File ), closed and pending  
V) Report  containing details of letters dispatched by a section  within a 
specific period  
VI) Report  containing list of all the Files  and Receipts  pending  within a 
specific period  
VII) Depar tment  wise PUC Pending  Report  which contains list of PUC 
attached in a File /Not attached in a file  (section  wise and employee wise 
within a Department).  
2.2 Audit  Requirements for e -Files /Records  
In order to meet audit  requirement of records maintained/generated  in e -office, 
concerned Audit  office (at appropriate  level) may exerc ise following options 
(depending upon the requirements and circumstances): - 
I) Request Railway  Administration  for PDF version of each e -office file  
created/generated through e -office.  
II) The concerned Railway  Audit  offices (At Zonal  Headquarters , 
                                                           
91Like scope , file  number, Receipt  Number, Dispatch Number, Subject, Diary Date, letter date, ca tegory/sub -
category, Sender Name, creation year, computer  number etc.  
Chapter 22 –e-Office  
 
690 
For internal use of IA&AD  Division /Workshop /Construction  etc.) having railnet  facility may 
approach concerned  Railway Administration   (at appropriate  level) for 
creation of User IDs for their Auditors for sharing files /viewing reports92 
with privilege to download their pdf version .  
III) In order to enable exchange of e -files between the Railway  e-Office  and 
IA&AD  e-Office93, a bridge  is required to be created for which NIC  can 
be approached throug h IS Wing of HQ  office after obtaining approval  for 
creation of Bridge  from Railway Administration . 
IV) For Transaction Log  files, NIC /RailTel Administratio n need to be 
approached.  
3 PERSONNEL INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
(PIMS ) 
Personnel  Information  Management  System  (PIMS )/eService Book is  an 
electronic  format of Physical  Service  Book that contains details of every aspect 
of an employee record as per the provision of Physical Service Book. It is a Role 
based web  application  that allows users (Personnel/Admin section ) to create and 
update employee's personal data and employment records according to the access 
and role privileges  assigned to them.  It contains details pertaini ng to employee’s 
personal information (Name, Designation, qualification , address etc.), salary, 
family  members, nomination , qualifying /non-qualifying service , leave , 
HBA /Advances , penalties /disciplinary cases etc.  
4 TOUR MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
Tour  Management  System  (eTour ) is an automated system  that facilitates the 
management  of employee tour  programmes, from the time  of applying for tour to 
final settlement  of bills . This system  facilitates employees  to apply,  cancel  and view  
their tour records. It facilitates the Reporting/Approving Authority  to examine and 
accept/ reject or keep the tour proposal in pending  state for some reason. The 
system  facilitates proper ac countal of all tour requests     .  
5 SMART  PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL REPORT 
RECORDING ONLINE WINDOW (SPARROW ) 
The electronic  Annual  Performance  Appraisal  Report  (SPARROW ) is an online  
system  based on the comprehensive performance  appraisal  dossier that is 
maintained for each member of the service . The module  facilitates electronic 
filling of PAR  (Performance Appraisal Report) by officers anytime from 
                                                           
92As per RB letter No. 2020/Tele/Dev/e -office phase -3 dated 9.9.2020 , e-office is to be executed  in Zonal/Divisional  
Audit  offices  
93 In Railways , e-office operates on Railnet  whereas in IA&AD , e-office operates on NICNET (IA&AD network ) 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
691 
For internal use of IA&AD  anywhere as per their convenience. Similar convenience will be available to the 
officers at different stages in the workflow h ierarchy  of filling and submission 
process.  
The main activities performed in the SPARROW are as under: - 
5.1 Standard  Procedure  
The SPARROW  module  facilitates a Custodian (Repr esentative of CR Section ) 
to create (having facility to edit/update/delete) and generate Performance  
Appraisal Report  (PAR )  for the assessment  period and forward the same to  
officer Reported upon. It facilitates the officer to be reported upon to fill the PAR 
and send to Reporting Authority . It facilitates the Reporting Authority to view 
the completed PAR, grade the PAR and forward it to Reviewing Authority.  It 
facilitates the Reviewing Authority to view the PAR, grade the PAR and forward 
to Accepting Authority.  It facilitates the  Accepting Authority to view the PAR, 
finalize the grading for the PAR and send it to the custodian. It facilitates the 
Custodian  to forward the PAR to the officer and the officer to accept the PAR 
and send to custodian. Alternatively, the officer may put for representation by 
recording reasons. The PAR is, thus, closed.  
5.2 Representation  
It facilitates the officer willing to represent  to  forward the request to custodian. 
It facilitates the Custodian to forward the request to the concerned Authority .  It 
facilitates the concerned Authority (Reporting & Reviewing & Accepting 
Authorities), depending on Accepting Authori ty, to either modify the grade or 
record comments  and forward it to the Custodian.  It facilitates the  Custodian to 
forward the PAR  to Officer (employee) and the Officer (employee) may accept 
the PAR and send it to the Custodi an.  Based on this, the PAR is closed.  
The module  facilitates downloading completed PAR  in PDF format.  
6 LEA VE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
eLeave is a centralized system  for maintenance  of leave  record. It is a simple  intuitive 
workflow based system  to apply for leave  online , track  the status of  applied  leave , to 
provide details  of leaves  taken,  balance  leaves etc. Approval  of leave  is enabled 
through  the automated  hierarchical  channel  of submission  and leave  is routed as 
per the hierarchy  pre-defined in the work  flow.  
 The system  facilitates users to apply for leave , check their updated leave  balance , 
check their approved  workflow i.e. the hierarchy  through which their leave  
moves, to extend/curtail/cancel their sanctioned  leaves, to track  their leaves  by 
getting notification/alert regarding sanctioned /approved leaves via SMS /Email 
etc.  
Chapter 22 –e-Office  
 
692 
For internal use of IA&AD  The module  generates various reports  such as Report  containing details of all 
types of leaves including those of subordinates pertaining to a specific period of 
time, Report containing leave  history alongwith st atus of leaves applied etc.  
The eLeave system  helps to eliminate the paper based applications  and facilitates 
faster and time  bound processing . 
7 KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
Knowledge  Managem ent System  (KMS ) component of eOffice  is a Central  
Repository  of Documents from  where the users can publish as well as access the  
information. KMS controls the life cycle  of documents , enabling users to create, 
upload and manage electronic  documents  that can be  viewed,  searched,  shared  
and published.  It  also facilitates tracking  of the different versions of  modified 
documents  by different users (Tracking  history). It contains  a dynamic  workflow  to 
keep  document  in various stages.  
8 COLLABORATION AND MESSAGING SERVICES  
eOffice’s ‘Collaboration  and Messagi ng Services ’  helps users to communicate  
effectively  and share  information  in real time. It has three sub -components  i.e. 
Appointment , Instant Messaging Services and e -Talk.  
The ‘Appointm ent’ section  facilitates in performing various activities like 
scheduling appointments, meetings, events, convention etc.  
The Instant Messaging Services  (IMS) section  provides users a fu nctionality 
through which they can exchange messages over the eOffice portal  in real time . 
The eTalk  ( Instant Chat application ) section  is an effective communication  on 
the usage of words and facilitates a team to work  together over a geographical 
distance and let internal  users, systems and departments  to communicate.  
 
 
*******************  
 
 
 
 
693 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 ANNEXURE – ‘A’ 
 
MAKING OF RAM  (6TH EDITION)  
 
To accomplish the objective  of revision  of RAM , Headquarters  office assigned one or 
two departments  of the Railways to various Zonal Audit  Offices94 and they were directed 
by the Headquarters office to collate/prepare comprehensive information about the 
departments assigned to them.  
A Core  Committee  at the level of DGA /PDA  under the chairmanship of DGA, Northern 
Railway was constituted to monitor the progress of work in this regard and to resolve 
issues and doubts (if any) raised by the field offices. The Committee had to consider all  
the changes carried out i n guidelines /instr uctions issued by the C&AG  of India  and 
changes made in Codes /Manual s of Indian Railways . DGA s/PDA s from Audit offices of 
Central Railway, Southern Railway, North Western Railway and RPU were  members  of 
the Core Co mmittee . 
The committee initially prepared a model chapter on Engineering Department.  After 
getting the model chapter approved from the Headquarters office, the model chapter was 
circulated to all the concerned zonal Audit offices and were requested to provide 
feedback on the departments  assigned to them.  
The concerned zonal Audit  offices submitted their feedback on the departments  assigned 
to them to the Core  Committee .  The first level of examination of the  feedback , in respect 
of all the departments , received from  the concerned zonal audit offices was carried out 
by the office of DGA /Northern  Railway (Chairman  of the Committee).   
Thereafter, the Core  Committee , in its  Review m eeting on revision  of RAM , held on 25th 
June 2020 , decided to consolidate the material/feedback received from all the concerned 
zonal Audit offices in the form of a book.  The feed back/material received from al l 
concerned offices was  organized  in the form of chapters  (department wise feedback was 
converted into chapters) as per the format suggested by the Headquarters office and it 
was given a book shape by  the office of DGA /Northern  Railway.   As per the decision 
taken by the Core Committee in its meeting on 25th June 2020, various chapters were 
distributed among the Core Committee Members on 11th August 2020  for examination 
and vetting.  
The feedback/suggestions received from the Core  Committee  Members were 
incorporated in the draft RAM .   The updated  chapters  of draft RAM were once again 
                                                           
94 CR, ER, ECR, ECoR, NR, NCR, NFR, NWR, RPU & Metro Rail, Rail Commercial , SR, SCR, SER, SECR, SWR, 
WR, WCR,  
Making of RAM (6th Editon)  
 
694 
For internal use of IA&AD  examined by the office of DGA/N orthern Railw ay. Thus, re -iteration proc ess was 
followed to validate the material contained in the present RAM.  
On 14th October 2020, Headquarters  office suggested for examination and incorporating 
suitably provisions contained in various guidelines/guidance notes95 and deve lopments 
that took place in Railways viz. IPAS , e-office application, restructuring of Railway 
Board  etc. In response to Headquarters s uggestions, requisite feedback obtained from all 
the concerned zonal Audit  offices, was examined by the Core  Committee  and the same 
was incorporated in the RAM  by the office of DGA /Northern  Railway. Thereafter, the 
Core Committee decided to submit firs t draft of the RAM to Headquarters office on 11th 
June 2021.  
In September 2021, Headquarters  office suggested to incorporate list of items to be 
checked during inspection of few departments .  In this regard, feedback sought  from the 
zonal audit offices was examined and finalized by the Core  Committee  Members and 
was incorporated in the RAM . 
Thereafter, final draft RAM  was submitted by the Core  Committee  comprising Shri Rajiv 
Kumar Pandey, Director General of Audit  (Northern  Railway  - Chairman of the Core 
Committee) and three Members i.e. Shri Sandip Roy, Director General of Audit ( Central  
Railway ), Shri Nedunchezhi an C, Director General of Audit ( Southern  Railway ) and Ms. 
Tripti Gupta, Principal Director of Audit ( North  Western  Railway ) to Headquarters  office 
on 8th February 2022.  
Headquarters offic e, in June 2022, distributed chapters  of the RAM  among SR, CR, SCR 
and NWR Audit  office s for final vetting.  The feedback/corrections received in this regard 
were suitably incorporated in the manual . 
                                                           
95Such as Performance  Audit  Guidelines, Standing Orders on Auditing in IT Environment, Financial  Attest  
Auditing Guidelines, Compliance  Audit Guidelines, PPP Auditing Guidelines, C&AG ’s Auditing Standards 2017, 
C&AG’s Rules & Regulations  2020 etc.  
 
 
695 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 APPENDIX -I 
SAMPRATI  
1. INTRODUCTION  
A need has been felt for some time now, to have an audit product that could flag  
issues of concern, even during the execution phase, especially in project and 
outcome -oriented activities of the governmen t. The Hon’ble Prime  Minister , 
while addressing the Indian Audit  and Accounts  Department on 16 November 
2021, on ‘Audit Diwas’, had desired that Audit may reach out to stakeholders (to 
become mo re effective). SAMPRATI  – Status Alerts in Monitoring Projects 
Related Actions and Targets of Importance – is an effort in that direction.  
Indian Railways simultaneously execut es many projects worth several thousand 
crores  of rupees, at an y given point of time. Through ‘SAMPRATI ’, it is the 
endeavor of Audit  to highli ght issues of concern that can be addressed promptly. 
As this is not l inked to the timelines of the conventional audit report th at needs 
to be tabled in the  Parliament , the envisaged response time is two weeks. 
Any sign ificant issues featuring in SAMPRATI could later be considered for 
inclusio n in the audit reports too, if considered appropriate.  
SAMPRATI  while slated to evolve over time includes four parts. Part A  contains 
results  of data analysis of at least one significant database of Indian Railways. 
Part B  flags issues of c ost escalation and sub -optimal financial/physical progress. 
Part C  contains alerts emanating from analysis of security related aspects 
impacting assets and credibility of Indian  Railways. Part D  contains a brief 
description o f the problem areas, and felt perception of consequences, in a few 
selected ongoing projects.  
I) The SAMPRATI  Reports will be issued to the GM, Zonal Railways by 
concerned DGA /PDA  on quarterly basis. The quarterly SAMPRATI 
Reports will be sent by all the Zonal field offices to the Lead Auditor , viz 
Principal  Director  of Audit  (Railway Commercial ) who will submit the 
same to the Headquarters  office, for approval.  
II) No SAMPRATI  Reports will  be issued without the approval of the 
Headquarters  office.  
III) The National issue of SAMPRATI  will also be consolidated by the lead 
Auditor  and sent to Hdqrs office for approval.  
IV) The first quarterly SAMPRA TI Report for issue to the General  Manager  
(SECR) was approved on 2/6/2022.   
V) The first issue of SAMPRATI  (National) was issued to the Chief 
Executive Officer  & Chairman  Railway Board , Ministry of Railways, 
SAMPRATI  
 
696 
For internal use of IA&AD  New Delhi  and a copy to Minister  of Railways on 8/6/2022. ( Format of 
the first National edition  attached  hereafter)  
VI) However, as the SAMPRATI  Report is still evolving, the format may 
undergo modifications, improvements with experience and response from 
the Railway Administration/ Field offices etc.
 
 
697 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  
 
Status Alerts  in Monitoring  Projects  Related  Actions  and Targets  of 
Importance  
Volume 1 -2022  National  First Edition, Ju ne 2022  
INTRODUCTION  
A need has been felt for some time now, to have an audit product that could flag  
issues of concern, even during the execution phase, especially in p roject and 
outcome -oriented activities of the government. The Hon’ble Prime  Minister , 
while addressing the Indian Audit  and Accounts  Department on 16 November 
2021, on ‘Audit Diwas’, had desired  that Audit may reach out to stakeholders (to 
become more effective). SAMPRATI  – Status Alerts in Monitoring Projects 
Related Actions and Targets of Importance – is an effort in that direction.  
Indian Railways simultaneousl y executes many projects worth several thousand 
crores of rupees, at any given point of time. Through ‘SAMPRATI ’, it is the 
endeavor of Audit  to highlight issues of concern that can be addressed promptly. 
As this is not linke d to the timelines of the conventional audit report that needs 
to be tabled in the Parliament , the envisaged response time is two weeks. Any 
significant issues featuring in SAMPRATI could later be considered for inclusion 
in the audit re ports too, if considered appropriate.  
SAMPRATI  while slated to evolve over time includes four parts. Part A  contains 
results of data analysis of at least one significant database of Indian Railways. 
Part B  flags issues of cost escalation a nd sub -optimal financial/physical progress. 
Part C  contains alerts emanating from analysis of security related aspects 
impacting assets and credibility of Indian Railways. Part D  contains a brief 
description of the problem areas, and felt perception of con sequences, in a few 
selected ongoing projects.  
We trust that the Indian Railways find this quarterly audit product useful. We 
welcome Railways’ feedback and inputs for improvement.  
  

RESTRICTED CIRCULATION  SAMPRATI June 2022  
 
 
698 
For internal use of IA&AD  Part – A 
Results of analyses of a database of IR  
 
1. Ongoing Projects with 0  (zero) Capital Expenditure (CapEx)  
Analysis of Indian Railway Projects Sanction and Management (IRPS M) data in 
May 20xx  revealed xxxx projects of concern across zones. No C apital 
Expenditure  had been incurred, on these proj ects, till the end of March 20xx , even 
after lapse  of revised target date . 
Table 1 – Projects with Zero CapEx  
Plan Head  Number of 
Projects with 
Zero CapEx  Total 
sanctioned Cost  
(₹ in Crore)  
16 - Traffic Facilities    
17 – Computerisation    
18 - Railway Research    
29 - Road Safety  - Level Crossings    
30 - Road Safety  - ROB/RUB    
31 - Track Renewals    
32 - Bridge Works    
33 - S & T  Works    
36 - Other Electrical Works , including 
TRD    
42 - Workshops  including P us   
51 - Staff Welfare    
53 - Passenger Amenities    
64 - Other Specified Works    
65 - Training/HRD    
Total    
Source: IRPSM  
From the table above, it will be seen that xxx (over xx per cent) of these xxx 
projects (as per list in Annexure -1) pertained to critical components like Track 
Renewals, Level Crossings, ROB/RUB and other bridge works. Therefore, it is a 
matter of concern that large number of critical projects were yet to take off even 
after lapse of their revised target dates for completion.  
 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
699 
For internal use of IA&AD  Recommendation  
 It is recommended that Railways address the vulnerabilities and associated 
potential costs in respect  of delays, especially in projects impacting safety and 
passenger amenities.  
2. Status of ‘Super Critical’ Projects target ed to be completed by March 20xx  
MoR identified96 xx projects, as ‘super critical’, which we re to be completed by 
March 20xx . Of these,  xx project s were ongoing as of 31 May 20xx97. In xx of 
these xx ongoing projects, the target date for completion has not been revised 
despite the original/revised target date having already lapsed, keeping the 
completion schedule open ended. Some of these projects where either the 
physical progress was less than xx per cent , or where the target date for 
completion was March 2021 or earlier, are highlighted below. In the remaining 
cases, the physical progress ranged between xx and xx per cent . 
Table 2 – Some  ‘Super Critical’ projects where original and revised target 
dates for completion have lapsed, and further revised dates have not been 
fixed  
Zone  Project  Sanction 
Year  Target Date  Physical 
Progress  
(per 
cent ) 
Original  Revised   
      
      
Source: IR PSM  
Further, in case of xx of the xx  ongoing projects, t he expenditure as on 31 May 
20xx , exceeded the last sanctioned cost. The total expenditure varied from xxx to 
xxx per cent . This indicated that the revised costs had not been sanctioned, which 
might i mpact the progress of work.  
Recommendation  
 IR may prioritize the ‘super critical’ projects and sanction funds at the earliest, 
to ensure that the projects aren’t delayed further.  
 
                                                           
96 Ministry of Railways issu ed (December 20xx) the ‘Vision 20xx/20xx’ document, identifying capacity 
enhancement projects that need to be completed, and the volume of traffic  20xx  MT that needs to be 
targeted by the Year 20xx . 
97 The data has been taken from IRPSM, on 31.05.20xx.  
RESTRICTED CIRCULATION  SAMPRATI June 2022  
 
 
700 
For internal use of IA&AD  Part – B 
Cost Escalations and Sub -optimal Financial /Physic al Progress  
1. Completed and Ongoing projects, where expenditu re exceeded sanction by 
over XX per cent . 
Analysis of IRPSM data of xx  Zonal Railways (other than xx Railway ) revealed 
that in at least xxx completed and ongoing projects (Sanctioned Estimate - ` xxx 
crore and Revised Estimate - xxx crore), the expenditure incurred had exceeded 
the sanction by over xx per cent.   
It is a matter of concern that in such a large number of projects, expenditure had 
exceeded the sanction. In xxxx  Railways, of xx such p rojects/works, in xx 
projects/works valuing xxx crore, expenditure incurred exceeded the sanction by 
over xxx per cent . Similarly, in Central  Railways, expenditure had exceeded the 
sanction by over xxx per cent  in xx projects.  
This is indi cative of systemic flaws in estimating project costs, and in according 
approvals.  
Recommendation  
 The process of project cost estimations and of according approvals/sanctions  
needs to be reviewed.  
2. Ongoing ‘Super Critical’ projects, where R evised Estimates have exceeded 
the Original Estimates by over xx per cent.  
A large number of ‘super critical’ projects were delayed, and their Revised 
Estimates exceeded their Original Estimates. A few such super critical projects 
where the gap between the  Financial  and Physical progress was more than xx per 
cent, or where physical progress was less than xx per cent , have been tabulated 
below.  
Table 3 – Ongoing ‘Super Critical’ projects, where Revised Estimates have 
exceeded  the Original Estimates by over xx  per cent . 
  
Source: IRPSM  Project  Estimates  
(` in crore)  Revised 
Estimate as 
percentage 
of Original 
Estimate  Financial  
Progress  Physical 
Progress  
Original  Revised     
      
      
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
701 
For internal use of IA&AD  From the table above, it is seen that the Revised Estimates ranged between xxx 
and xxx per cent  of the Original Estimate. This is indicative of defective original 
estimates, or increased cost of the works attributable to award of contracts 
without prerequisites, delays in commencement and  completion of projects, etc. 
Moreover, the abnormal increase in Revised Estimates render them questionable, 
and requires their critical analysis.  
Recommendation  
 While confirmation of revised estimates being sanctioned following the due 
process is sought, it is recommended that Indian Railways analyze the processes 
leading to defects in estimates or time and cost overruns, and address the issues 
therein.  
Part – C 
Issues related to Railway Security  
Security  is a major concer n in IR. Security related incidents range from theft to 
robbery and crime against women, to trafficking in narcotics and children. A 
couple of important aspects are highlighted below.  
1. Registration and Detection of cases under RP (UP) Act . 
Year  No. of cases 
registered  Value of property  
(` in crore)  No. of 
persons 
arrested  Stolen  Recovered  
     
     
     
It will be seen from the table above that from xxxx  to xxxx  (March), as against 
the reported stolen property of xxx crore, the recovery s tood at xxx crore (around 
xx per cent ). 
2. Operation ‘NARCO’ – Recovery of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances (NDPS)  
Year  Value of NDPS 
recovered (` in crore)  No. of persons 
arrested  
20xx    
20xx    
20xx    
Average of 20xx to 20xx    
20xx    
20xx (Ja nuary to March)    
RESTRICTED CIRCULATION  SAMPRATI June 2022  
 
 
702 
For internal use of IA&AD  It will be seen from the table above, that despite xxxx  being a COVID affected 
year, and despite a possible fall in passenger traffic , the number of arrests has 
gone up, even relative to xxxx  and xxxx , which were pre -COVI D. This is 
indicative of the fact that the deterrence is not strong enough. This is a matter of 
concern.  
Part – D 
Problem areas and consequences in a few selected ongoing projects  
1. New Broad Gauge Line ( xxxx ) not completed even after xx years of sanction 
– XXXX  Railway  
Introduction  
 Railway Board  (RB) sanctioned (19xx)  survey of a new line between  XXXX  and 
XXXX , under XXX  Railway ( XXX ). The new line was to benefit the rural 
population of the area, open business opportunities for trade an d industry and 
reduce the distance between Xxx and Xxx City by xx kilometres.  
 The Engineering -cum-Traffic Survey report contained two proposals submitted 
to RB in July xxxx  which envisaged a completion period of xx years. Proposal I 
(with tun nel) was for a route length of xxx  km, construction cost of  xxx crore, 
and ROR of ( -) xx%, whereas, Proposal II (without tunnel) was for longer route 
length of xx km, lesser construction cost of xxx crore and with better ROR of ( -) 
xxx%. However, P roposal I with higher cost and more negative ROR was 
sanctioned by RB in xxxx -xx. 
 Proposal I (wit h tunnel) was approved (May 20xx ) by RB at a sanctioned cost of 
`xxxx  (revised to xxx crore in xxxx ) and the work on the project started in xxxx -
xx. After pass age of xx years, the project is still incomplete and the physical 
progress of the work is xx per cent  as on March 20xx .  
 This project is funded solely by IR. Audit  observed that for more than  xx years, 
budget grant amounting to xxx crore was not utilised. In at least s even years, 
funds amounting to xxx  crore were surrendered.  
 In March xxxx , the estimate was again revised to xxxx  crore. The lat est 
anticipated cost (March 20xx ) was xxxx  crore. Out of the total length of xxx km, 
only xxx km was commissioned in xxxx . The remaining stretch of xxx km has 
been targeted for commissioning in December xxxx .  
 The tunnelling work had progressed slowly right from the award of the contract 
and there was no progress during xxxx -xx. During, xxxx -xx, there was  only 
meagre progress.  
 Points of concern  
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
703 
For internal use of IA&AD   The project cost had increased from xxxx  crore to xxxx  crore (latest anticipated 
cost), i.e., escalation of over xxx per cent . Despite lapse of xx years since start of 
work, work of only xxxx  km out of the xxxx  km has been completed, i.e., around 
xx per cent . 
 Going by the current progress of tunnelling and other works, the completion of 
the project by rev ised targeted date of December xxxx  appears unlikely.  
 Recommendation  
 Specific causes of delays need to be analy sed and a time -bound action plan to 
complete the remaining work framed.  
 The progress needs to be monitored closely at the Board  level, to avoid further 
cost overrun or delays.  
2. Sanction of xxxxx  3rd line works – need to reconsider  – XXXX  Railway  
Introduction  
 The Cabinet Committee  on Economic Affairs approved ‘in principle’ (February 
xxxx ) the projects of XXXX . The XXXX  was to handle coal traffic  for the power 
plants, finished steel, food grains, cement, ferti lizers, limestone to steel plants and 
general goods.  
 In xxxx -xx RB sanctioned the work of xxxxx  3rd line ( xxx km), for an estimated 
amount of   xxxx  crore. The XXX -XXX  section is also covered by the XXXX .  
 The XXX -XXX  3rd line envisaged requirement of path  for bulk freight traffic  of 
coal, cement, fertilizer, steel, POL, food grains etc. It was also stated that this 
section was already handling traffic beyond its capacity, and that in recent years, 
traffic had increased phenomenally and ther e was no sign of any decline in rail 
traffic.  
 The XXXX i s in an advanced stage (Financial  Progress -xx per cent  till March 
20xx ). The pre -COVID target date of completion o f the XXXX project was June 
20xx . 
 The XXX -XXX  3rd line work is in t he initial stage, and expenditure of only XXX  
crore  had been booked up to March 20XX . 
Points of concern  
 A simulation exercise by IIT Bombay for NITI Aayog and XXXX  on XXXX  
software estimated the line capacity utilization at only about  XX per cent , for the 
XXX -XXX  section, as against the  xxx per cent  estimated by IR.  
RESTRICTED CIRCULATION  SAMPRATI June 2022  
 
 
704 
For internal use of IA&AD   During the outcome based audit98 on ‘Punctuality and Timeliness in Train 
Operations’, the simulation exercise on XXXX  software also revealed ample 
spare capacity in this section.  
 Given the prese nt line capacity utilisation estimated by different agencies and 
prospective shifting of the bulk of goods traffic  to XXXX , the utilisation of the 
XXX -XXX 3rd line would need reassessment.  
 The XXX stated (March 20xx ) that xx per cent  goods traffic  likely to be diverted 
to XXXXX had been accounted for in the DPR of 3rd line.  
Recommendation  
 Capacity utilization and the need for the 3rd line needs to be critically revaluated 
in view of various studies on existing capacity utili sation, upcoming upgradation 
projects for increase in speed, and commissioning of  XXXX  in near future.  
3. Inordinate delay in implementation of XXXXX  New Rail Link Project -
XXXXX  Railway  
Introduction  
 The XXXXX  Railway engaged ( xx November 20xx ) XXXXX  for const ruction 
of the XXXX Link  Project (portion within India ). The proj ect was to be 
completed within XX  months of agreement or the date of handing over of 
encumbrance free land by XXX  to XXXX , whichever was later. The last piece of 
land was handed  over in April 20 xx 
 In July xxxx , MEA conveyed Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance ’s 
approval of the estimated cost of xxxx  crore ( xxxx  crore for the Indian side, to be 
funded by Ministry of XXXXx  and xxxx crore for the XXXXX  side to be funded 
by MEA).  
 XXXXX submitted (March 20xx ) revised estimates (for Indian portion) 
amounting to XXXXX  crore to XXXX  i.e., an escalation of  xxxx  crore for the 
work within India .  
 Railway Board  forwarded (Novembe r 20xx) these revised estimates to Ministry 
of XXXXX  for approval, but despite lapse of more than xxx years, the approval 
had no t been received. Till March 20xx , physical progress of th e Indian portion 
of work was xx per cent.  The work is targete d for com pletion in October 20xx . 
 Contract for the XXXXxxx  part o f the line was awarded (May 20xx ) by 
Bangladesh Railways to M/s XXXXX Ltd. for construction of main line track 
                                                           
98 Para 2.1.8.5(a)(i) of C&AG ’s Report No . xx of 20 xx 
Railway Audit Manaul  
 
705 
For internal use of IA&AD  and other works. MEA appointed XXXX  as ‘project management  consultant’  
(PMC) for the XXXXX  part of the line.  
 The stipulated date of completion of works for Bangladesh p art of the line was 
January 20xx . Two extensions of time have alre ady been granted up to June 20xx , 
and the thi rd extension up to December 20xx  is yet to be a pproved by XXXX  
Railways. Meanwhile, XXXX  have sought fourth e xtension of time up to June 
20xx , which was under consideration of the PMC. Physi cal progress as of 
February 20xx was only xxxx  per cent . Given that the  contract was signed in May 
20xx  and that Texmaco have completed only around xx  per cent  of the work  
(financial progress of around xx  per cent) , it is highly unlikely that the work will 
be completed even in t he extended time until June 20xx . 
Points of Concern  
 Revised estimates submitted by XXXX in  March 20xx  were yet to be approved. 
Delay in funding is likely to delay the completion of the project.  
 Work in XXXX  was behind schedule. Unless work on the XXXX  side also is 
completed, the line cannot be operationalized. Delay of work in XXXX  may also 
result in cost escalation.  
 No attempt seems to have been made to tap those who are most likely to benefit 
from the new line – for instance oil companies , heavy industry etc. to partner 
funding of the project.  
Recommendations  
 MoR needs to tak e up the issue with MEA, MoF and XXXX  for ensuring 
availability of funds for the project, and explore alternative arrangement of 
getting the work done at risk and cost of M/s XXXXX  Ltd. 
 MoR may ex plore the possibility of XXXX  not getting further (governmen t) work 
in India , on the basis of their poor performance in XXXX . 
4. Delay in Asset (Land ) Monetisation of land parcel at XXXXX  
Introduction  
 During Demand for Grants 20xx -x, monetization of assets was declared as a new 
financing opt ion for new infrastructure projects. It was announced that a National 
Monetization Pipeline of potential brownfield infrastructure assets would be 
launched.  
 While appraising the status of the above announceme nt during demand for grants 
20xx -x, it was state d that  XXXX  had been involved for monetization of identified 
railway assets of XXX  railway land parcels among other projects. XXXX  had 
already identified a land parcel at  XXXX , a site near XXXX , for monetization.  
Points of Concern  
RESTRICTED CIRCULATION  SAMPRATI June 2022  
 
 
706 
For internal use of IA&AD  A review of the progress of the monetisation of land parcel at XXXX, near XXXX  
revealed the following:  
 As per RB’s letter of 06 March 20xx, XXX, a site near XXXX  (XXX hectare or 
xxxx acre/xxxx  sq. m.) was identified by XXXX  Railway as spare land deemed 
fit for commercial  development as per feasibility studies done by XXXX . This 
land was to be handed over to XXXX  for commercial d evelopment. However, in 
May 20xx , XXXX  Railway refused to hand over the land to the XXXX , asserting 
that the land could not be spared, as  a proposal for Suburban Terminal at XXXX  
was under process.  
 The proposed Suburban Terminal, however, did not materialize.  
 Railway Board  subsequently in July 20xx (after xx years) directed XX  to hand 
over th e above mentioned land to X XXX  for commercial  development.  
 Despite Railway Board ’s direction, the land had not been handed over by XXXX 
Railway so far (March 20xx ). 
 Thus, commercial  exploitation of the land was still to ma terialize despite lapse of 
over XX years, since RB’s decision.  
Recommendation : 
 Since the announcement regarding monetization of assets was made by the 
Government in the Parliament , Railway Board  needs to proactively  ensure 
handing over the land to XXXX . 
 
 
 
New Delhi  Director  General /Principal  Director  
June 2022  (Railway Board  Audit /Railwalys)  
 
 
 
 
707 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 APPENDIX -II 
CONSTITUTION OF AUDIT REVIEW COMMITTEE  
 
  

 
 
708 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 APPENDIX -III 
ONE IAAD ONE SYSTEM (OIOS ) 
1. Background  
At present, information is stored in a heterogeneous and distributed manner – in 
paper -based files (accessible only thro ugh file number and title, or through 
personal knowledge), in electronic  files (but with haphazard naming and versions, 
and stored on personal desktops/removable drives, or in some cases shared 
folders on LANs) and in some cases in local ized, in -house IT systems (but 
without a common data dictionary).  
The quality of data (paper  based/ digital) is variable – In the absence of automated 
control mechanisms, there are significant risks of incompleteness of data, 
inaccuracies, version inconsi stencies etc. This is accentuated by the fact that even 
the in -house IT systems are largely based on post -facto data entry.  
There are no mechanisms for systematic sharing of data – whether it is from one 
audit assignment to other, or similar audit assignm ents in the future, or between 
audit offices (field/ Headquarters ). Each individual audit assignment is an end in 
itself, and there are no real mechanisms for using past data (or data from other 
similar instances). Any such sharing or exchange that takes place is person  
dependent (or very occasionally, manual  process dependent)  
Although the audit processes are governed by centralized Auditing Standards, 
Guidelines and Manuals, these have tended to, over time, vary and de viate across 
audit streams and even across audit offices within the same audit streams. Many 
of these variations are consciously done due to differences in functional needs, 
but some are not (and this is accentuated by the lack of automation).  
There are n o significant automated/ electronic  MISs covering audit activities. 
Within Field Audit  Offices, control is exercised through submission of manual  
registers and manually compiled “returns” to be submitted for review according 
to a prescribed hierarchy  and frequency of submission. Similarly, Field Audit 
Offices submit a variety of “returns” to Headquarters  Office.  
2. Enterprise -wide System  
OIOS  is an end -to-end en terprise -wide, integrated IT system for all audit activities 
in IA&AD , covering all Field Audit  Offices and the Headquarters  Office. With 
complete roll -out & implementatio n it will be the primary system of record (single 
source of truth) for the entire chain of audit activities (from the maintenance of the 
auditee universe through audit execution, to QA/QC and finalization of audit 
products of different types and their foll ow-up), and will cover all types of audit. It 
is a workflow -based IT system, and not based on post -facto data entry.  
One IAAD One System (OIOS)  
 
709 
For internal use of IA&AD  OIOS  has a common core structure which ensures consistent, reliable data in a 
uniform format across all Audit  Offices. OIOS is also “configurable”, this allows the 
application to be used by all Audit streams including Railways, Commercial , 
Revenue, etc. It also will be having MIS with configurable dashboards and drill -
down, dispensing with paper -based registers and returns.  
3. Empowering the Auditor  
OIOS  is not just an audit process management  system. An equally important 
component of OIOS is to empower the auditor in various ways –  
I) Through a Knowledge  Management System(KMS ) with both audit guidance 
and auditee information in different formats,  
II) The ability to search through and mine data within OIOS  to refine our audit 
approach and processes  
III) The ability to electronically li nk and reference (and re -use) supporting 
documentation and other evidence (e.g. geo -tagged, time -date stamped 
formats)  
IV) IT enabled audit toolkits to facilitate  implementation of Audit  Design  
Matrices through data collection in individual audit assignments.  
4. Web -based Solution  
OIOS  is web -enabled solution with support for multiple languages , accessible in a 
platform independent  manner. Limited offline functiona lity, as also a mobile app 
with key -document scanner facility, is available as a back -up to the field audit teams. 
At the same time, rigorous information security controls (for maintaining 
confidentiality, integrity, availability and non -reputability) have  been implemented, 
and access to data is controlled on a need -to-know basis based on role & privilege 
access controls.  
5. Functionalities/Services  Available  
OIOS , IT application provides following services related to core audit processes for 
all types of Audit  – Performance  Audit, Compliance  Audit, Financial  Attest  Audit –  
I) Audit  planning of audit assignments.  
II) Detailed audit design of the audit as signments.  
III) Execution of the audit plan through Field audit and design and collection of 
data.  
IV) Reporting of findings observed during execution and recommendations made 
thereafter.  
V) Communication  of audit objections, products to audit ee & various 
stakeholders.  
VI) Follow -up on action taken on Audit  products containing findings and 
recommendations.  
VII) Reporting and dashboard services.  
VIII) Institutional management  of knowledge(KMS ).  
IX) Migration of legacy  data.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
710 
For internal use of IA&AD  6. Helpdesk Facility  
The operational support for OIOS  is provided, through Functional Helpdesk system 
at IAAD level, which in -turn raises tickets/issues with vendor’s centralized help desk 
which provides technical support in  timely manner to resolve application issues 
based on criticality of the issue
 
 
711 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
712 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 NOTES  
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________ _____________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________ _____________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________ _______________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________ _______________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________ _
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________ _________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
NOTES  
 
713 
For internal use of IA&AD  ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________ _________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________ ___
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________ ___________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________________ ___________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________ _____
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________ _____________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________ _____________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________ _______
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________ _______________________________
______________________________________________________________________
NOTES  
 
714 
For internal use of IA&AD  ______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________ _______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________ _________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________ _________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________ _
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________ _________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________ ___________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________ ______________________ ___________________________________
_____________ _________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________ ___________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________ _____________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________________________________ _____________________________________
NOTES  
 
715 
For internal use of IA&AD  ______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_________ _____________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________ _______________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________ _______________________________________
_____________________________________ _______________________________ __
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______ _______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ _________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________ _________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_____ _________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ ___________________
______________________________________________________________________  
 
 
NOTES  
 
716 
For internal use of IA&AD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
717 
For internal use of IA&AD  INDEX  
A 
AAC  ................................ ......508, 510, 531, 533  
Abandoned  ................................ ...........  193, 410  
ab-initio  ................................ ........................  513 
abolition  ................................ .........  95, 100, 118  
Abse ntee ...........................  42, 66, 344, 442, 486  
Absorption  ................................ ... 658, 664, 666  
Abstract  .... 85, 86, 152, 176, 179, 218, 412, 475, 
511 
Abstract Estimate  ................................ . 179, 218  
Academy  ................................ ..............  567, 576  
ACC  ................................ .............................  496 
Access  ................................ .....99, 273, 360, 575  
accessories  ................................ ...................  376 
Accident  ... 45, 52, 113, 123, 127, 154, 155, 164, 
165, 168, 170 , 185, 186, 201, 242, 256, 281, 
282, 283, 298, 299, 304, 306, 324, 326, 328, 
329, 341, 345, 353, 354, 365, 394, 397, 398, 
402, 408, 409, 412, 426, 428, 431, 432, 499, 
548, 550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 
558, 559, 560, 561, 562, 563, 564, 662  
Accid ents ..... 123, 149, 151, 164, 168, 220, 239, 
264, 282, 305, 310, 330, 350, 382, 383, 384, 
395, 397, 399, 402, 408, 416, 421, 460, 548, 
550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 566, 575, 670  
Accommodations  .........................  110, 195, 407  
Account  .... 25, 26, 27, 28, 37, 41, 49, 52, 53, 56, 
60, 61, 62 , 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 76, 81, 82, 
84, 89, 97, 101, 108, 109, 116, 117, 118, 
121, 129, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 144, 152, 153, 154, 155, 162, 167, 168, 
190, 195, 196, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215, 
216, 219, 224, 226, 227, 228, 230, 232, 2 36, 
239, 246, 248, 255, 265, 267, 275, 280, 287, 
292, 293, 322, 324, 343, 346, 353, 379, 402, 
410, 413, 437, 440, 441, 445, 446, 448, 449, 
453, 462, 469, 471, 475, 477, 478, 479, 481, 
482, 483, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 
492, 493, 494, 495, 502, 50 9, 511, 512, 521, 
528, 529, 530, 532, 534, 537, 538, 540, 541, 
542, 543, 545, 546, 548, 572, 578, 586, 587, 
588, 594, 595, 596, 597, 598, 603, 607, 609, 
614, 660, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 
682, 683, 684, 685, 688  
Account Current  ........  65, 87, 413, 442, 481, 483  Accountal  ..... 137, 139, 141, 142, 212, 213, 264, 
276, 291, 440, 461, 462, 486, 487, 490, 500, 
501, 509, 510, 544, 681, 683, 684  
Accounting Standards  ................................ .. 586 
Accounts  1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 , 
48, 51, 52, 55, 56, 58, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 
70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 
88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 94, 109, 117, 119, 122, 
123, 131, 136, 137, 138,139, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 157, 158, 162, 168, 169, 177, 188, 189, 
191, 193, 194, 195, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 
209, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 221, 225, 
228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 236, 255, 258, 261, 
263, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 275, 276, 
278, 280, 281, 287, 288, 289, 291, 292, 293, 
323, 328, 343, 347, 357, 379, 396, 401, 406, 
411, 413, 4 14, 419, 424, 429, 433, 435, 438, 
439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 447, 448, 449, 450, 
452, 459, 462, 464, 466, 468, 470, 472, 474, 
476, 478, 479, 480, 482, 483, 484, 485, 486, 
487, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 495, 505, 511, 
512, 514, 526, 527, 528, 529, 531, 532, 53 3, 
534, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 542, 543, 544, 
545, 574, 577, 584, 585, 586, 587, 588, 594, 
595, 597, 598, 606, 607, 609, 614, 619, 624, 
656, 659, 672, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 
681, 682, 684, 685, 695, 697  
accrual  ............................. 35, 247, 280, 595, 608  
Accuracy  59, 63, 67, 69, 70, 228, 231, 270, 288, 
291, 413, 442, 443, 445, 446, 448, 470, 471, 
473, 474, 482, 511, 540, 574, 576, 586, 587, 
608 
ACF  ................................ ..............................  412 
ACHD  ................................ ..................  149, 170  
Acknowledgement 264, 266, 345, 434, 455, 529, 
532, 537, 688  
ACMD  ................................ .........................  149 
Acquisition  ....... 37, 77, 157, 174, 176, 188, 205, 
214, 215, 218, 295, 413, 467, 658, 662, 665, 
667 
Act ...... 4, 10, 76, 81, 93, 96, 107, 123, 124, 126, 
140, 151, 156, 166, 171, 187, 197, 199, 200, 
211, 216, 219, 225, 230, 231, 242, 254, 259, 
260, 261, 281, 282, 284, 298, 300, 317, 323, 
370, 373, 407, 439, 453, 454, 471, 502, 558, 
564, 566, 568, 569, 570, 571, 573, 581, 583, 
INDEX  
 
718 
For internal use of IA&AD  585, 593, 605, 606, 607, 608, 613, 614, 615, 
616, 618, 621, 622, 624, 625, 626, 629, 633, 
634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 
643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 
652, 653, 654, 656, 665, 673, 701  
Action  20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 49, 54, 55, 67, 68, 
75, 90, 99, 132, 159, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
168, 192, 197, 224, 227, 229, 256, 259, 260, 
265, 268, 279, 280, 281, 283, 284, 285, 295, 
296, 300, 302, 304, 305, 330, 334, 340, 341, 
353, 357, 358, 375, 389, 391, 395,396, 397, 
398, 408, 442, 444, 448, 451, 454, 473, 474, 
483, 487, 521, 524, 525, 526, 529, 532, 533, 
535, 536, 537, 538, 540, 541, 542, 550, 553, 
554, 557, 558, 568, 573, 576, 577, 636, 670  
Activities  .... 40, 93, 96, 130, 166, 241, 242, 255, 
268, 300, 303, 319, 323, 331, 373, 399, 425, 
546, 550, 554, 557, 616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 
621, 622, 623, 624, 625, 626, 627, 628, 629, 
661, 671  
Acts .......................  373, 451, 454, 568, 569, 576  
ADAMS RAIL  ................................ .............  661 
Adaptation  ................................ ............  244, 664  
Adaption  ................................ ......................  666 
Additional  .... 16, 17, 33, 54, 55, 75, 89, 93, 112, 
119, 127, 147, 157, 170, 173, 177, 179, 181, 
190, 208, 209, 236, 237, 283, 312, 322, 324, 
338, 350, 370, 372, 375, 422, 424, 425, 428, 
498, 523, 557, 566, 567, 575, 579, 595, 620, 
624, 625, 659  
ADEN  ................................ ..................  182, 227  
Adhoc  ............................  249, 250, 252, 570, 577  
Adjustment  ....... 82, 84, 185, 187, 205, 211, 216, 
292, 440, 441, 478, 538, 539  
Adjustment Account  ..............................  82, 512  
adjustments  ...... 68, 72, 83, 84, 87, 88, 195, 209, 
232, 337, 390, 413, 440, 445, 448, 481, 483, 
522, 528, 538  
ADME  ................................ ..................  424, 428  
Administration 16, 17, 18, 21, 23, 24, 39, 40, 55, 
56, 57, 70, 72, 107, 126, 127, 128, 132, 161, 
181, 189, 192, 200, 202, 203, 225, 230, 256, 
259, 260, 262, 263, 265, 267, 273, 274, 279, 
282, 283, 284, 285, 354, 355, 356, 361, 375, 
427, 438, 448, 472, 478, 542, 551, 554, 5 57, 
574, 577, 584, 585, 589, 619, 670, 682, 687, 
689, 690  
Administrative  .. 17, 18, 125, 173, 174, 239, 284, 
358, 365, 372, 386, 388, 429, 474, 477, 478, 
618, 645, 646, 647, 659  Admitted  73, 113, 158, 189, 265, 266, 267, 276, 
280, 281, 293, 435  
Admitted debit s ................................ ..............  73 
ADMOs  ................................ ........................  149 
Adoption  ................................ ..............  666, 669  
ADRMs  ................................ ........................  237 
Advance  ... 52, 96, 129, 130, 145, 317, 530, 532, 
689 
Advanced  ................................ .....................  659 
Advances  48, 50, 62, 78, 83, 84, 96, 98, 99, 116, 
118, 129, 138, 139, 190, 222, 223, 225, 374, 
410, 439, 471, 489, 536, 570, 577, 595, 597, 
608, 671, 673, 690  
Advertisements  ............. 237, 241, 245, 278, 495  
Advice  .... 74, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 211, 212, 
213, 215, 216, 265, 267, 276, 287, 288, 329, 
345, 347, 357, 441, 462, 476, 486, 507, 510, 
683 
Adviser  ................................ ... 17, 464, 496, 658  
Advisor  ................................ ...... 33, 39, 93, 128  
Advocates ................................ .............  128, 203  
AEEs  ................................ ....................  371, 424  
AENs  ................................ ............  174, 214, 215  
AFA  ................................ ....... 39, 424, 464, 511  
AFAs  ................................ ..............................  33 
Agencies ................................ ....... 107, 165, 241  
Agency  . 102, 141, 142, 179, 180, 181, 185, 186, 
187, 226, 245, 287, 297, 372, 520, 529, 660, 
667, 685  
Agenda  ................................ .........................  633 
Agreement  .... 204, 205, 210, 262, 354, 355, 356, 
361, 367, 49 2, 575, 626, 627, 628  
Aided  ................................ ............  204, 380, 411  
AIDS  ................................ ....................  165, 170  
AIMS  . 97, 98, 99, 108, 109, 114, 115, 118, 136, 
138, 140, 144  
Air 115, 379, 453, 454, 602, 608, 617, 620, 639, 
663, 665, 678  
Air-brake  ................................ ......................  661 
Airtel  ................................ ............................  395 
Alert  ................................ .....................  347, 408  
Alerts  ................................ ....................  695, 697  
Allahabad  ................................ .................  7, 372  
Allocation ... 4, 12, 13, 33, 36, 38, 54, 59, 63, 69, 
76, 86, 88, 89, 90, 108, 181, 191, 200, 218, 
219, 228, 229, 231, 232, 267, 321, 375, 410, 
435, 440, 441, 445, 447, 448, 468, 469, 470, 
472, 476, 477, 478, 486, 499, 514, 527, 528, 
530, 531, 560, 579  
 
 
719 
For internal use of IA&AD  Allotment  ..... 25, 27, 94, 96, 131, 139, 141, 177, 
286, 293, 325, 329, 332, 495, 512, 660  
Allowance  .. 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 98, 103, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 124, 137, 
139, 146, 357, 471, 570, 577, 602, 678, 680, 
682, 683, 684, 685  
Allowances ..... 25, 26, 27, 4 1, 42, 43, 66, 79, 80, 
81, 93, 95, 98, 104, 108, 109, 110, 113, 114, 
134, 137, 139, 141, 142, 144, 155, 177, 317, 
401, 471, 472, 560, 567, 570, 574, 576, 577, 
588, 597, 602  
Allowed  .............................  47, 67, 438, 439, 443  
Ambulance  ................................ ...........  168, 491  
Ambulances  ................................ .................  684 
AMC  .... 199, 314, 377, 379, 382, 383, 384, 396, 
411, 418, 450, 678  
Amendments  .........  236, 246, 255, 426, 502, 512  
Amenities  ..... 37, 78, 81, 94, 176, 178, 181, 196, 
213, 236, 237, 239, 240, 243, 283, 341, 379, 
397, 417, 425, 429, 431, 622, 623, 628, 681  
Ammunition  .......................... 493, 570, 578, 580  
Ammunit ions ................................ ....... 493, 685  
Analysis  ... 23, 28, 65, 69, 84, 97, 124, 155, 178, 
179, 182, 186, 187, 196, 199, 245, 254, 288, 
291, 299, 311, 317, 318, 320, 327, 328, 330, 
333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 341, 349, 354, 
374, 375, 378, 380, 381, 397, 401, 406, 414, 
433, 445, 456,  460, 461, 477, 479, 500, 501, 
509, 523, 532, 550, 553, 554, 557, 570, 594, 
661, 664, 665, 668, 670  
Analytical  ................................ ....................  587 
Annexure A  ................................ ..............  56, 82  
Annexure B  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure C  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure D  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure E  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure F  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure H  ................................ ....................  83 
Annexure I  ................................ .....................  83 
Annexure J  ................................ ...............  83, 90  
Annexur e K ................................ ..............  90, 91  
Annual  ...... 20, 23, 26, 30, 46, 53, 70, 76, 95, 97, 
108, 119, 131, 138, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
150, 151, 157, 164, 167, 168, 174, 175, 178, 
181, 186, 188, 191, 192, 193, 194, 198, 204, 
211, 212, 214, 220, 284, 297, 302, 322, 324, 
334, 356, 371, 372 , 373, 379, 389, 426, 430, 
437, 450, 451, 468, 484, 485, 495, 532, 533, 
541, 551, 552, 578, 586, 594, 598, 601, 606, 
633, 659, 660, 672, 681, 690  APAR  ............................ 16, 18, 23, 30, 119, 120  
Apex  ....... xxx, 2, 21, 22, 23, 39, 40, 95, 96, 151, 
152, 154, 155, 175, 176, 177, 208,  214, 236, 
242, 244, 256, 300, 321, 371, 372, 394, 400, 
401, 410, 484, 485, 496, 499, 500, 501, 549, 
569, 570, 584, 593, 606, 659  
APO  ................................ ....... 94, 133, 424, 464  
Appeal  ... 30, 93, 94, 99, 126, 365, 551, 557, 563  
Appendix  ...... 3, 47, 88, 180, 327, 330, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 33 5, 336, 343, 346, 347, 660, 675  
Application  ......xxix, xxx, 23, 41, 49, 51, 97, 99, 
104, 121, 178, 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 250, 
253, 274, 277, 282, 283, 302, 314, 316, 317, 
318, 334, 354, 360, 361, 362, 365, 381, 398, 
400, 403, 409, 410, 433, 434, 456, 457, 48 3, 
501, 502, 503, 506, 511, 526, 585, 589, 595, 
690, 692  
Applications  . xxx, 21, 23, 40, 97, 138, 140, 141, 
152, 156, 176, 178, 244, 246, 250, 255, 268, 
274, 284, 311, 359, 400, 403, 404, 433, 434, 
455, 483, 502, 570, 584, 585, 660, 665, 692  
Appointment  ...... 19, 32, 47, 50, 52, 94, 95, 101, 
102, 103, 104, 105, 108, 137, 139, 144, 152, 
160, 168, 214, 215, 241, 407, 488, 489, 494, 
595, 596, 600, 601, 692  
Appointments  ...........................  95, 97, 101, 103  
Apportioned  .................. 205, 206, 268, 364, 375  
Apportionment  ................ 74, 206, 239, 268, 478  
Appraisal  .. 30, 95, 119, 125, 203, 204, 380, 488, 
600, 670, 687, 690  
Apprentices  ..................... 43, 107, 111, 143, 477  
Appropriate  ...... 20, 58, 106, 127, 132, 157, 188, 
206, 219, 221, 224, 257, 278, 281, 312, 349, 
354, 393, 424, 439, 440, 474, 477, 484, 525, 
527, 531, 537, 559, 598, 600,  601, 607, 689, 
690 
Appropriation  ... 1, 12, 13, 32, 37, 55, 56, 76, 81, 
82, 83, 84, 89, 90, 131, 201, 202, 208, 382, 
383, 411, 412, 414, 433, 483  
Appropriations  ...................  55, 76, 83, 202, 448  
Approval  .... 20, 29, 44, 103, 104, 105, 114, 119, 
124, 126, 132, 134, 150, 152, 1 60, 174, 175, 
176, 180, 189, 190, 200, 201, 202, 218, 219, 
220, 227, 299, 311, 331, 355, 381, 388, 389, 
396, 399, 400, 411, 421, 435, 436, 499, 507, 
522, 525, 526, 527, 528, 532, 535, 589, 590, 
599, 658, 666, 667, 669, 671, 688, 690, 691  
Approvals  ................................ .............  596, 662  
Approved  ..... 45, 54, 57, 70, 130, 157, 158, 170, 
180, 181, 188, 195, 200, 220, 224, 278, 331, 
INDEX  
 
720 
For internal use of IA&AD  354, 358, 389, 390, 399, 451, 463, 520, 523, 
529, 531, 590, 595, 606, 614, 630, 691  
APROs  ................................ .........................  237 
AQMS  ................................ ..................  314, 364  
Arbitration  .. 16, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 60, 128, 188, 
189, 19 1, 215, 216, 230, 231, 256, 375, 407, 
435, 462, 490, 491, 545, 681  
Architectural  ................................ ........  599, 600  
Arithmetical  ..... 59, 64, 66, 67, 70, 75, 231, 270, 
441, 443, 448, 471, 473, 477, 482, 511, 526, 
574, 576  
Arm ................................ ..............................  685 
ARME  .. 154, 164, 165, 170, 428, 431, 432, 458, 
459, 555  
Arms .............................  567, 570, 576, 578, 580  
ARMV  ..................  154, 164, 170, 559, 562, 563  
ARPAN  ................................ ....................  41, 97  
Arrears  ................................ ..... 41, 50, 118, 685  
Arrival  ...........................  315, 319, 359, 363, 365  
ART  45, 185, 306, 365, 397, 424, 428, 431, 432, 
458, 459, 555, 559, 562, 563  
Article  ................................ ..............  4, 159, 170  
Articles  ... 61, 271, 279, 452, 4 75, 479, 480, 483, 
486, 520, 521, 522, 528, 530, 533, 540, 541, 
603, 608, 609  
AS .........................  300, 585, 591, 595, 613, 615  
ASMs  ................................ ...........................  238 
Assembly  ................................ ...............  10, 366  
Assertions  ................................ ............  585, 587  
Assessment  24, 40, 41, 105, 120, 125, 159, 160, 
187, 207, 262, 271, 297, 299, 307, 322, 324, 
349, 37 3, 374, 377, 406, 407, 431, 484, 500, 
524, 528, 554, 587, 590, 659, 666, 668, 671, 
691 
Asset  .... 192, 193, 280, 298, 315, 318, 322, 364, 
375, 381, 404, 405, 450, 553, 595, 633, 658  
Assets  ... 16, 37, 56, 77, 78, 80, 81, 84, 118, 152, 
155, 156, 157, 173, 176, 177, 183, 184, 185, 
186, 187, 188, 193, 205, 218, 223, 280, 295, 
297, 299, 310, 314, 322, 342, 369, 370, 376, 
395, 396, 398, 400, 401, 403, 405, 410, 413, 
428, 450, 502, 550, 584, 589, 590, 591, 595, 
596, 597, 598, 608, 609, 619, 625, 638, 666, 
670, 679  
Assimil ation  ................................ . 658, 662, 667  
Assistant  ..... 18, 30, 94, 103, 113, 131, 170, 174, 
198, 210, 236, 237, 238, 282, 302, 337, 351, 
365, 371, 372, 380, 392, 393, 424, 428, 429, 
448, 449, 464, 494, 496, 499, 510, 549, 568, 
623, 673  Assistant Engineers  ................................ ...... 174 
Assistant Materials M anagers  ......................  499 
Assisted  ................................ ........  177, 191, 210  
Association .... 104, 122, 238, 464, 605, 608, 609  
Asst.  ................................ ...............  33, 620, 621  
Assurance  ...................... 347, 492, 496, 661, 671  
ASTE  ................................ ...................  394, 398  
Athletic ................................ .........................  605 
ATM  ................................ .... 334, 335, 336, 365  
Attendance  ... 24, 25, 26, 27, 44, 47, 52, 66, 121, 
137, 138, 139, 140, 141,  142, 143, 149, 160, 
162, 163, 164, 185, 209, 211, 212, 214, 215, 
343, 346, 347, 438, 439, 442, 444, 470, 471, 
472, 485, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 
494, 496, 545, 577, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 
680, 681, 682, 683, 684, 685  
Attest  .... 2, 13, 89, 216, 232 , 233, 267, 277, 588, 
594, 603, 613, 694, 709  
ATVM  ................................ .. 241, 245, 269, 272  
Auction . 156, 187, 210, 265, 291, 292, 320, 461, 
487, 501, 502, 506, 507, 508, 540, 546  
Auctioneer's  ................................ .................  541 
Audit  .... xxx, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 
23, 24, 26, 27, 39, 40, 41, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 
59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 
74, 75, 76, 79, 83, 84, 89, 90, 91, 97, 101, 
102, 104, 105, 106, 108, 109, 110, 112, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 125, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 136, 137, 139, 
140, 141, 14 2, 143, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 
160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 178, 
183, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 197, 198, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 
207, 209, 211, 212, 213, 215, 216, 218, 220, 
222, 223, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 232 , 
233, 236, 245, 246, 254, 255, 256, 259, 260, 
261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 267, 268, 269, 270, 
271, 272, 274, 275, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 
283, 284, 285, 286, 288, 291, 292, 298, 300, 
301, 307, 312, 313, 314, 321, 322, 327, 328, 
330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335,  336, 337, 338, 
340, 343, 344, 346, 347, 349, 352, 353, 354, 
355, 356, 357, 361, 363, 364, 371, 372, 373, 
374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 394, 
395, 396, 401, 403, 404, 410, 411, 413, 419, 
433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 
442, 443, 444, 445, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 
454, 459, 462, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 
472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 
481, 482, 483, 484, 485, 486, 487, 489, 490, 
 
 
721 
For internal use of IA&AD  491, 492, 493, 495, 496, 499, 501, 502, 503, 
505, 506, 511, 512, 514, 515, 516, 517, 518, 
519, 521, 525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530, 531, 
532, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 
542, 543, 545, 548, 550, 553, 555, 557, 558, 
559, 560, 562, 567, 569, 570, 571, 572, 573, 
574, 577, 578, 579, 580, 584, 585, 586, 587, 
588, 589, 590, 593, 594, 595, 59 8, 599, 600, 
601, 602, 603, 606, 607, 608, 611, 612, 613, 
614, 615, 633, 659, 660, 665, 666, 669, 671, 
672, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 
684, 685, 689, 690, 693, 694, 695, 697, 702, 
706, 708, 709  
Audit Reports  ...........................  20, 23, 373, 606  
Auditable  . 39, 371,  372, 394, 484, 496, 501, 659  
Audited  23, 54, 62, 97, 156, 178, 203, 229, 245, 
363, 374, 401, 433, 435, 438, 472, 501, 570, 
574, 575, 576, 577, 579, 585, 611, 660  
Auditing  ... 14, 24, 26, 27, 32, 39, 40, 59, 64, 86, 
118, 123, 136, 137, 150, 151, 155, 157, 178,  
204, 206, 207, 216, 231, 232, 233, 246, 267, 
292, 357, 358, 360, 362, 372, 373, 374, 378, 
393, 401, 468, 469, 484, 501, 502, 526, 603, 
608, 659  
Auditor  .. xxix, xxx, 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 484, 585, 595, 
603, 615, 656, 689, 695  
Authorities  . 57, 76, 99, 179, 195, 197 , 201, 228, 
262, 283, 302, 323, 333, 334, 344, 378, 389, 
398, 435, 438, 449, 463, 474, 485, 522, 527, 
544, 566, 573, 590, 598  
Authority  .. 19, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29, 42, 44, 45, 51, 
52, 54, 57, 58, 63, 64, 72, 75, 76, 82, 89, 99, 
101, 103, 106, 108, 109, 114, 11 5, 116, 119, 
120, 124, 127, 130, 151, 157, 158, 163, 164, 
165, 170, 175, 179, 182, 184, 188, 190, 195, 
200, 201, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 
225, 226, 227, 229, 231, 233, 256, 262, 267, 
269, 270, 277, 278, 281, 300, 327, 356, 357, 
389, 411, 435, 436 , 437, 438, 445, 447, 448, 
450, 451, 453, 468, 469, 471, 472, 480, 500, 
511, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 
530, 531, 532, 535, 537, 539, 540, 541, 550, 
554, 555, 557, 558, 561, 563, 572, 580, 584, 
588, 593, 595, 600, 601, 602, 606, 622, 623, 
627, 662, 676, 677, 683, 684, 685, 690, 691  
Auto Freight Train Operator Scheme  ...........  283 
Automatic  .... 247, 272, 337, 358, 359, 386, 399, 
400, 401  
Autonomous  .... xxix, xxx, 2, 111, 204, 250, 583, 
584, 588, 593, 594, 595  Average  ...... 47, 51, 67, 120, 273, 293, 298, 312, 
313, 339,  340, 352, 377, 438, 443, 450, 472, 
474, 496, 508, 513, 516, 533, 539, 578, 603  
Award  ...... 21, 57, 188, 189, 221, 222, 230, 256, 
283, 355, 435, 495, 551, 554, 638  
Awards  ................................ ... 24, 191, 256, 553  
Axle  .......................  297, 305, 322, 344, 400, 625  
B 
Balance ..... 37, 52, 53, 65, 68, 69, 70, 7 3, 74, 75, 
76, 77, 82, 84, 88, 98, 104, 146, 187, 207, 
225, 245, 247, 265, 266, 269, 276, 277, 280, 
286, 288, 289, 290, 291, 304, 309, 310, 312, 
320, 328, 345, 350, 413, 445, 447, 448, 481, 
482, 484, 501, 509, 533, 534, 536, 537, 538, 
539, 541, 545, 586, 5 87, 588, 591, 594, 595, 
596, 597, 598, 606, 607, 609, 613, 614, 691  
Balance Sheet  . 73, 74, 75, 76, 82, 245, 265, 266, 
269, 276, 280, 286, 291, 413, 586, 588, 591, 
594, 596, 597, 598, 606, 609, 613, 614  
Ballast  ...........  184, 185, 186, 193, 208, 209, 669  
Bandobast ................................ .....................  576 
Bank  ....... 25, 26, 28, 62, 86, 142, 145, 183, 184, 
204, 222, 247, 248, 264, 270, 278, 407, 475, 
502, 524, 525, 526, 529, 595, 597, 598, 608, 
609 
Bank Balances  ................................ ...... 595, 597  
Banks  .............................. 85, 132, 153, 162, 595  
Banned  ................................ .................  508, 509  
BAR  ................................ .............................  508 
Barracks  ................................ ....... 570, 578, 579  
Barriers ................................ .........................  402 
Batch ................................ ............  475, 479, 483  
Battalion  ................................ ...............  566, 567  
BCCI  ................................ ............................  605 
BCP  ................................ ......................  361, 365  
BDRCL  ................................ ................  612, 624  
Benefit  ...............  94, 96, 130, 131, 139, 141, 257  
Bharat  ................................ ...................  365, 663  
Bharuch  ................................ ........  612, 624, 645  
Bhubaneswar  ................................ .... 7, 612, 647  
Biannual  ................................ .......................  671 
Bibek  ................................ ............................  205 
Bid ................................ .503, 506, 508, 535, 599  
Bid sheet  ................................ ......................  506 
Bidder  ...........  194, 221, 224, 278, 508, 523, 601  
Bidding  ......................... 206, 502, 599, 600, 601  
Biennial  ................................ ........................  660 
Bilaspur  ................................ ............................  7 
INDEX  
 
722 
For internal use of IA&AD  Bill ... 25, 26, 27, 32, 67, 98, 117, 119, 144, 145, 
146, 271, 404, 440, 443, 487, 493, 511  
Bill of lading  ................................ ................  529 
Billing  ................................ ..........  432, 458, 459  
Bills  .... 24, 25, 26, 27, 41, 42, 48, 53, 54, 60, 6 1, 
62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71, 85, 88, 94, 98, 
108, 109, 115, 116, 128, 133, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 151, 152, 158, 162, 168, 183, 190, 
195, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
216, 218, 224, 225, 228, 229, 232, 245, 270, 
271, 275, 277, 287, 288, 291,  292, 346, 374, 
378, 407, 410, 419, 438, 443, 444, 445, 458, 
459, 462, 463, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 475, 
482, 488, 489, 494, 503, 504, 505, 511, 526, 
527, 534, 535, 543, 545, 570, 576, 577, 602, 
603, 606, 672, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 
682, 684, 685, 690 
Bin................................ ................................  510 
Bio.... 42, 98, 138, 139, 141, 144, 146, 357, 439, 
455 
Biometric  ................................ ...............  47, 361  
Biometrics  ................................ ....................  361 
Black listed  ................................ ..................  524 
block  ................................ .............................  186 
Block  .... 56, 76, 82, 84, 122, 186, 194, 263, 264, 
297, 307, 310, 312, 322, 340, 342, 347, 350, 
353, 356, 359, 373, 386, 397, 400, 401, 4 09, 
414, 416, 558, 575  
Blocks  .. 198, 199, 297, 299, 303, 306, 322, 325, 
329, 340, 353  
Board .. 2, 3, 6, 9, 12, 16, 17, 30, 60, 86, 93, 100, 
101, 102, 104, 105, 127, 128, 141, 145, 147, 
150, 156, 157, 163, 164, 170, 178, 180, 181, 
188, 196, 208, 221, 222, 236, 2 39, 255, 267, 
268, 283, 285, 297, 310, 319, 321, 322, 323, 
324, 336, 359, 361, 375, 379, 382, 383, 384, 
395, 396, 418, 419, 422, 425, 429, 458, 462, 
464, 466, 467, 468, 483, 504, 512, 544, 549, 
550, 551, 552, 553, 556, 558, 560, 561, 575, 
593, 599, 605, 60 6, 616, 617, 623, 624, 625, 
633, 664, 678, 703  
Bodies  .......................  2, 204, 285, 588, 594, 595  
Bonus  . 41, 47, 66, 67, 93, 96, 98, 128, 138, 139, 
145, 272, 273, 438, 443, 444, 447, 472, 473, 
474, 478, 570, 577  
Book Average Rate  ................................ ...... 508 
book value  ............................. 512, 538, 541, 596  
Booking  .. 23, 69, 70, 73, 90, 210, 237, 238, 240, 
241, 243, 247, 248, 257, 258, 260, 267, 270, 
271, 272, 273, 274, 276, 287, 297, 315, 318, 324, 357, 358, 406, 429, 437, 445, 446, 455, 
470, 472, 477, 482, 486, 555, 559  
Booklet  ................................ .........................  551 
Books  ... 1, 18, 19, 21, 25, 27, 36, 39, 40, 54, 61, 
62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 75, 84, 85, 86, 87, 98, 
138, 140, 142, 143, 146, 168, 178, 179, 180, 
190, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 229, 
240, 241, 255, 264, 271, 280, 284, 287, 288, 
291, 292, 344, 347, 375, 410,419, 437, 442, 
445, 462, 463, 47 5, 482, 483, 487, 488, 489, 
490, 491, 493, 494, 495, 533, 534, 535, 536, 
537, 558, 598, 606, 607, 672, 679, 680, 682, 
685 
Bottleneck  ................................ ....................  305 
Brake  ................................ ............  354, 355, 562  
Branch  .... 19, 21, 26, 71, 75, 118, 120, 128, 139, 
157, 188, 209, 227, 236, 237, 280, 281, 292, 
307, 38 1, 393, 426, 435, 449, 468, 494, 550, 
557, 670, 673, 677, 681, 684, 685  
Breach  ................................ ..........................  113 
Breaches  ................................ ....... 220, 281, 550  
Break down  ................................ ............  45, 662  
Breakage  ................................ ...... 168, 264, 492  
Breakages  ................................ .............  487, 684  
Breakdown  ................................ ..... 45, 663, 678  
Bridge  .... 78, 176, 182, 185, 186, 194, 196, 237, 
243, 259, 354, 367, 564, 668, 690  
Bridges  ..... 56, 79, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 182, 
183, 187, 192, 196, 197, 200, 208, 210, 218, 
223, 242, 243, 277, 283, 344, 451, 566, 624, 
625, 668, 675  
Broad  .... 119, 197, 239, 295, 299, 308, 311, 313, 
365, 614, 624, 626  
BRs ................................ ..............................  545 
BSNL  ................................ ... 302, 333, 395,  397 
Budget  .. xxx, 3, 9, 25, 27, 28, 32, 33, 37, 39, 40, 
55, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 91, 97, 98, 142, 150, 
168, 174, 177, 180, 181, 191, 196, 200, 201, 
202, 230, 325, 328, 370, 374, 379, 393, 397, 
399, 401, 405, 424, 426, 427, 428, 433, 435, 
449, 458, 462, 485, 499, 512, 513, 537, 556, 
560, 567, 606, 607, 608, 609, 617  
Budgetary  . 32, 36, 37, 38, 76, 77, 150, 174, 205, 
325, 389, 393, 397, 619, 672  
Budgets  ................................ .... 32, 38, 619, 672  
Build  ................................ .... 206, 616, 621, 627  
Builders  ................................ ........................  513 
Building  . 56, 134, 141, 142, 175, 194, 195, 223, 
373, 425 , 463, 488, 499  
 
 
723 
For internal use of IA&AD  Buildings  79, 155, 173, 175, 176, 192, 194, 195, 
210, 213, 214, 245, 278, 373, 378, 446, 478, 
489, 570, 579, 625, 628, 673, 681, 682  
Bulletins  ................................ .......................  560 
Bungalow  ................................ .............  137, 139  
Bureau  ................................ .....30, 521, 567, 668  
Business  . 17, 235, 236, 297, 361, 365, 403, 404, 
405, 551, 621, 623, 629  
Business Development  .......... 6, 9, 236, 297, 583  
C 
C&AG  3, 4, 13, 39, 40, 298, 322, 512, 585, 589, 
608, 611, 615, 656, 693, 694, 704  
C&IS  ................................ ............................  584 
Cabinet  ..............................  6, 297, 323, 324, 551  
Cabins  ................................ ..........................  562 
Cable  ................................ ............  392, 397, 400  
Cadre  25, 26, 27, 41, 42, 46, 95, 97, 9 8, 99, 100, 
101, 109, 125, 129, 138, 140, 144, 147, 160, 
237, 298, 313  
CAG  ..... 10, 11, 12, 14, 204, 216, 222, 233, 371, 
372, 374, 375, 378, 380, 381, 603, 614  
Calendar  ....... 44, 45, 46, 52, 115, 125, 344, 555, 
558, 560, 576, 680  
Calibration  ................................ ...................  679 
Campus  ................................ ........................  673 
CAMS  ................................ ..................  314, 687 
CAMTECH  ................................ ..................  659 
Cancellation  ..... 71, 98, 127, 257, 258, 269, 270, 
277, 289, 325, 355, 359, 507, 537  
Cancer  ................................ ..................  165, 270  
Canon  ................................ ...........................  603 
Canteens  ................................ ...............  133, 477  
CAO  ....... 83, 173, 174, 175, 302, 314, 333, 334, 
365, 372, 388, 400, 424, 541  
Capital  32, 36, 37, 38, 63, 69, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 
83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 131, 192, 193, 
195, 200, 203, 228, 232, 380, 412, 428, 435, 
436, 437, 445, 448, 449, 452, 453, 458, 467, 
470, 512, 513, 522, 530, 532, 596, 597, 614, 
617, 618, 620, 621, 623  
Car................................ ......... 129, 283, 293, 679  
Card ...... 100, 121, 141,  146, 161, 211, 250, 251, 
252, 270, 272, 470, 473, 486, 487, 510, 675, 
676, 679, 681, 683  
Cards  .... 47, 66, 67, 99, 100, 272, 290, 438, 440, 
442, 443, 444, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 479, 
486 
Career  ................................ ......96, 125, 137, 139  
Cargo ................................ ............................  253 Carriage  .........  199, 301, 424, 428, 441, 6 61, 675  
Carriages  .................  80, 325, 428, 429, 436, 468  
Cash  ... 25, 26, 27, 28, 35, 39, 40, 59, 71, 72, 74, 
75, 84, 85, 86, 88, 98, 138, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 145, 169, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 215, 
231, 247, 248, 264, 265, 266, 269, 272, 273, 
276, 280, 287, 288, 289, 29 0, 291, 292, 342, 
419, 441, 462, 463, 470, 474, 475, 477, 484, 
486, 488, 489, 490, 491, 493, 494, 503, 510, 
511, 536, 545, 546, 556, 590, 591, 595, 596, 
597, 598, 609, 614, 619, 678, 681, 682, 683, 
684 
Cashier  ............................ 85, 265, 266, 494, 496  
Casual  24, 26, 27, 124,  126, 138, 139, 140, 141, 
142, 209, 211, 212, 214, 215, 287, 343, 346, 
485, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 
545, 581, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 
683, 684, 685  
Catalogue  ................................ .............  506, 508  
Category  . 47, 158, 182, 191, 285, 410, 518, 554, 
629 
Catering  .... 81, 82, 236, 238, 239, 277, 285, 286, 
293, 297, 366, 584, 611, 617, 635  
Caution  ................................ . 317, 345, 346, 347  
CBE  ................................ ..............................  174 
CBI ................................ .....................  20, 29, 30  
CCE  ................................ ..............................  388 
CCM (FM)  ................................ ...................  236 
CCM (FS)  ................................ ....................  236 
CCM (PM)  ................................ ...................  236 
CCM (PS)  ................................ ....................  236 
CCMs  ................................ ...........................  236 
CCO  ................................ .....................  236, 237  
CCRS  ................................ ... 298, 324, 395, 550  
CCTV  ................................ ...................  360, 578  
CDO  ................................ .............  318, 365, 4 24 
CE/MRTS  ................................ ....................  174 
CEA  ................................ .............  111, 112, 113  
CEE  ................................ ......................  371, 464  
CELE  ................................ ...........  309, 365, 371  
cell .........  128, 197, 237, 267, 514, 523, 545, 659  
Census  ................................ .. 311, 329, 343, 449  
Central  .. 7, 12, 20, 23, 28, 30, 36, 60, 70, 77, 90, 
91, 99, 108, 109, 116, 125, 131, 149, 150, 
151, 165, 170, 204, 254, 26 1, 281, 302, 303, 
309, 310, 317, 326, 328, 332, 334, 346, 366, 
372, 373, 382, 383, 392, 409, 413, 414, 440, 
455, 464, 466, 470, 543, 567, 568,576, 577, 
593, 594, 595, 611, 616, 632, 656, 659, 664, 
670, 678, 692, 693, 700  
INDEX  
 
724 
For internal use of IA&AD  Central Audit ...............  60, 70, 90, 204, 466,  470 
Centralized  ......................  74, 409, 457, 660, 662  
Centre  ....... 2, 143, 156, 170, 182, 185, 250, 284, 
365, 464, 561, 563, 583, 659, 664, 673, 687  
Centric  ................................ ..........................  394 
CEO  .. 6, 9, 17, 93, 150, 170, 620, 623, 627, 628  
Certificate  ...... 26, 41, 46, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 62, 
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 122, 136, 138, 140, 
142, 144, 154, 159, 163, 164, 167, 170, 177, 
204, 219, 221, 225, 230, 278, 281, 347, 401, 
437, 471, 474, 495, 506, 508, 511, 520, 522, 
525, 527, 529, 537, 581, 595, 597, 603,621, 
661, 667, 688  
Certification  ... 10, 75, 83, 84, 89, 154,  163, 177, 
200, 273, 379, 401, 434, 451, 455, 522, 585, 
595 
CESE ................................ ............................  371 
CFTM  .. 296, 297, 300, 302, 303, 309, 311, 327, 
330, 334, 365  
CGE  ................................ .............................  174 
CGHS  ................................ ...................  161, 170  
Chain  ................................ ............  205, 342, 566  
Chairman  .... 6, 9, 16, 17, 93, 102, 170, 281, 282, 
395, 549, 583, 593, 616, 617, 618, 619,  620, 
623, 627, 628, 629, 693, 695  
Chaper 2 - Audit of Accounts Department  .. 32–
91 
Chapter 1 - Audit of General Administration 
and Vigilance Department  ...................  16–30 
Chapter 10 - S&T Department  .............  386–419 
Chapter 11 - Audit  of Mechanical Department
 ................................ ................................ . 421 
Chapter 12 - Audit of Production Units  . 466–96 
Chapter 13 - Audit of Stores Department  .. 498–
546 
Chapter 14 - Audit of Safety Department  .. 548–
64 
Chapter 15 - Audit of Security Department  566–
81 
Chapter 16 - Centre for Railway Information 
Systems  ................................ ..............  583–91 
Chapter 17 - Rail Land  Development Authority
 ................................ .........................  593–603 
Chapter 18 - Working of Railway Sports 
Promotion Board  ................................ . 605–9 
Chapter 19 - Rail PSUs  ..........................  611–56 
Chapter 20 - Research Designs and Standards 
Organization  ................................ ...... 658–85 
Chapter 21 - e-Office  ...........................  687–706 Chapter 3 - Audit of Personnel Departmen t . 93–
147 
Chapter 5 - Audit of Civil Engineering 
Department  ................................ ...... 173–216 
Chapter 6 - Works Audit  ..............................  220 
Chapter 7 - Audit of Commercial Department
 ................................ ...........................  235–93 
Chapter 8 - Operating Department  ....... 295–367 
Chapter 9 - Audit of Electrical Department  369–
82 
chapters  .................  1, 2, 380, 467, 520, 693, 694  
Charge  ..... 47, 214, 225, 265, 273, 345, 355, 399  
Chargeable  ... 54, 69, 71, 72, 192, 200, 211, 213, 
219, 445, 467, 478  
Charged  ................................ ........................  413 
Charges  .... 48, 49, 54, 60, 61, 64, 66, 68, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 75, 78, 80, 108, 109, 115, 118, 127, 
133, 134, 137, 139, 1 41, 142, 153, 154, 158, 
161, 162, 163, 164, 167, 168, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 195, 197, 203, 206, 209, 210, 213, 
216, 229, 230, 232, 235, 239, 240, 242, 247, 
248, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 265, 266, 
267, 268, 270, 271, 273, 274, 275, 276, 279, 
286, 28 8, 291, 293, 313, 341, 343, 354, 355, 
356, 373, 378, 436, 437, 438, 441, 442, 444, 
446, 447, 448, 451, 452, 453, 458, 459, 460, 
462, 468, 469, 470, 471, 474, 476, 477, 478, 
479, 480, 481, 488, 489, 491, 492, 495, 527, 
530, 532, 534, 535, 536, 545, 546, 597 , 603, 
651, 661, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 682, 
683, 684  
Charted  ................................ .........................  608 
Chartered Accountants  ................................ . 585 
Charts  ............................ 299, 304, 344, 390, 426  
CHC  ................................ .............................  329 
CHD  ................................ .....................  149, 170  
Check  ..... 25, 26, 27, 55, 74, 109, 116, 137, 138, 
139, 140, 141, 142, 146, 168, 169, 195, 207, 
211, 212, 214,  215, 260, 261, 267, 287, 288, 
289, 290, 291, 292, 321, 340, 344, 346, 361, 
396, 405, 443, 462, 485, 488, 489, 490, 491, 
492, 493, 494, 495, 607, 664, 678, 680, 683, 
684, 685  
check sheets  ................................ .............  85, 86  
checklist  ................................ ...........................  2 
Checks  ...... 19, 22, 28, 58, 75, 97, 102, 103, 105, 
106, 110, 114, 116, 117, 118, 122, 125, 130, 
157, 158, 178, 188, 189, 192, 194, 225, 246, 
255, 256, 266, 269, 271, 274, 277, 279, 286, 
290, 293, 305, 352, 357, 363, 364, 375, 398, 
 
 
725 
For internal use of IA&AD  410, 411, 433, 434, 435, 439, 467, 470, 473, 
475, 502, 511, 524, 525, 553, 561,  577, 579, 
580, 589, 607, 659, 671  
Chemical  ............................... 492, 669, 670, 684  
Chemist and Metallurgist  .....................  424, 452  
Chennai  ................................ .... 7, 466, 583, 626  
cheques  .............................  85, 86, 411, 511, 597  
CHG  ................................ .............................  573 
Chief  .... 17, 30, 93, 94, 105, 128, 130, 132, 133, 
139, 149, 162, 170, 173, 174, 185, 198, 208, 
214, 215, 236, 237, 238, 266, 282, 295, 297, 
300, 301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 327, 328, 329, 
330, 331, 343, 345, 348, 365, 366, 370, 371, 
372, 386, 388, 390, 392, 393, 398,399, 424, 
427, 428, 429, 464, 466, 485, 486, 488, 489, 
490, 491, 492, 494, 496, 499, 512, 5 19, 534, 
549, 550, 555, 563, 567, 568, 569, 571, 574, 
578, 593, 605, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 627, 
628, 670, 671, 673  
Chief Administrative Officer  ...... 173, 174, 365, 
372, 386, 388  
Chief Engineers  ................................ .... 174, 185  
Chief Materials Managers  ............................  499 
Chief Mechanical Engineer  . 424, 427, 464, 485, 
496, 555, 563  
Chief Rolling Stock Engineer  ..............  424, 427  
Chief Security Commissioner  ..... 567, 568, 569, 
571, 574, 578  
Chief Track Engineer  ................................ ... 198 
Chief Workshop Manager  ............  170, 424, 429  
Child  .. 38, 46, 53, 111, 112, 113, 122, 145, 272, 
569, 573  
Child ca re ................................ .................  46, 53  
Children  ... 41, 53, 111, 112, 122, 131, 139, 141, 
573, 682  
Chittranjan  ................................ ...........  427, 472  
Chronological ................................ ...............  571 
Circuit  ................................ ..........  344, 396, 397  
Circular  104, 127, 181, 186, 244, 285, 324, 345, 
347, 357, 358  
Circulars  ... xxx, 72, 94, 161, 185, 208, 236, 239, 
244, 255, 263, 268 , 274, 277, 284, 285, 286, 
287, 299, 303, 316, 327, 335, 357, 358, 361, 
394, 398, 451, 557, 558, 560, 633  
Civil  ... 2, 9, 79, 80, 83, 173, 182, 218, 233, 282, 
302, 333, 344, 379, 380, 410, 411, 427, 550, 
552, 574, 578, 584, 621, 661, 670, 671, 675  
Claims  .. 39, 4 0, 81, 83, 236, 237, 239, 242, 245, 
264, 276, 281, 282, 315, 316, 462  Classification  13, 36, 54, 62, 72, 74, 77, 79, 110, 
240, 242, 255, 257, 258, 269, 290, 308, 405, 
412, 435, 468, 477, 518, 527, 538, 578  
Classified  56, 61, 62, 68, 84, 124, 193, 195, 196,  
200, 219, 303, 315, 444, 477, 541, 571, 588, 
596 
Clause  ................................ ..................  224, 524  
Cleanliness  ............  149, 154, 162, 166, 286, 434  
Clerk  ................................ ............................  103 
Clerks  ................................ ...........  238, 472, 494  
Cloakroom  ................................ ...................  276 
Clothing  129, 142, 211, 212, 213, 292, 485, 487, 
489, 491, 581  
Club  ................................ ..............................  134 
Clubbing ................................ .......................  507 
CLW  ..... 381, 427, 428, 466, 472, 496, 515, 519  
CME  ..............  155, 170, 424, 427, 451, 458, 464  
CMM  ................................ .... 424, 433, 455, 464  
CMMS  ................................ .........  433, 434, 455  
CMP  ................................ .............  152, 160, 170  
CMPE  ................................ .. 309, 365, 424, 428  
CMS  . 41, 45, 108, 114, 144, 149, 163, 164, 170, 
302, 314, 316, 321, 333, 357, 360, 361, 365, 
381, 594, 671, 684  
CNM  ................................ ....................  302, 334  
CO-6 ................................ ....................  183, 511  
CO-7 ................................ ....................  183, 511  
COA  ..... 302, 314, 316, 317, 321, 325, 333, 359, 
365, 409, 456, 457  
Coach  ... 274, 318, 319, 320, 354, 359, 360, 363, 
365, 366, 417, 425, 427, 433, 434, 455, 456, 
466, 496, 513, 611, 661  
Coach Mitra  ................................ .................  434 
Coaches  241, 242, 25 4, 268, 274, 275, 285, 313, 
318, 319, 320, 325, 326, 330, 332, 337, 338, 
340, 345, 348, 353, 359, 360, 363, 369, 373, 
421, 425, 428, 432, 433, 434, 451, 452, 455, 
456, 458, 459, 460, 461, 467, 469, 479, 486, 
530, 561, 608, 661, 663, 667  
Coaching  .. 70, 71, 23 5, 237, 242, 243, 245, 251, 
255, 268, 270, 274, 276, 277, 280, 289, 290, 
291, 295, 299, 301, 302, 305, 311, 318, 320, 
324, 325, 326, 329, 330, 332, 333, 336, 338, 
345, 346, 358, 364, 365, 366, 424, 425, 428, 
429, 431, 433, 434, 436, 439, 449, 453, 455, 
456, 459, 605, 661  
Codal  .. 68, 73, 90, 192, 194, 400, 410, 450, 451, 
452, 477, 478, 539  
Code  ..... 100, 157, 170, 188, 200, 201, 203, 209, 
255, 262, 263, 264, 267, 268, 269, 275, 280, 
INDEX  
 
726 
For internal use of IA&AD  281, 379, 394, 399, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 
440, 441, 442, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448 , 449, 
450, 451, 452, 453, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 
472, 474, 475, 476, 477, 479, 480, 481, 482, 
483, 503, 520, 528, 559, 562, 668  
Codes  . xxx, 1, 41, 138, 140, 394, 467, 489, 495, 
535, 558, 666, 668, 693  
COFMOW  .... 425, 426, 427, 430, 440, 464, 611  
COIS  ..... 314, 31 7, 318, 319, 320, 359, 365, 456  
Collaboration  ................  166, 558, 660, 687, 692  
Collection  ..... 155, 177, 210, 216, 235, 244, 245, 
264, 276, 325, 328, 407, 461, 554  
Collectors  ................................ .............  238, 289  
Colliery  ................................ ................  191, 262  
Colonies  ................  154, 166, 213, 214, 593, 681  
Colony  ................................ ..........  495, 670, 673  
Commander  ................................ .. 571, 573, 574  
Commanders  ................................ ................  568 
Commanding  ................................ ................  567 
Comments  84, 90, 160, 161, 162, 166, 179, 377, 
585, 615, 691  
Commercial  1, 2, 5, 9, 13, 16, 17, 19, 30, 32, 33, 
35, 36, 77, 78, 81, 82, 84, 88, 103, 119, 176, 
197, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 
245, 24 6, 247, 255, 262, 264, 267, 273, 274, 
275, 277, 278, 280, 283, 285, 286, 289, 290, 
291, 295, 297, 299, 303, 316, 326, 335, 337, 
339, 354, 451, 477, 503, 543, 584, 593, 594, 
598, 599, 600, 611, 617, 619, 620, 623, 627, 
628, 667, 693, 695, 706, 709  
Commissio n ... 20, 23, 28, 33, 94, 101, 102, 108, 
125, 137, 273, 402, 455, 551, 552, 553  
Commissioner  30, 199, 208, 326, 365, 396, 398, 
411, 464, 466, 493, 550, 551, 552, 563, 567, 
568, 571, 574, 605, 665, 673  
Commissioners ...................... 551, 552, 567, 568  
Commissioning  .... 206, 302, 33 3, 341, 372, 397, 
410, 427, 429, 450, 463, 589, 622, 628  
Committee  3, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 30, 32, 37, 125, 
130, 131, 139, 140, 155, 167, 168, 179, 180, 
205, 221, 222, 240, 241, 278, 285, 311, 323, 
325, 354, 365, 367, 395, 523, 531, 539, 548, 
550, 553, 554,  583, 590, 605, 670, 693, 694, 
703 
Commodities  .. 72, 237, 240, 242, 255, 257, 258, 
298, 299, 308, 313, 321, 323, 523  
Commodity  ..... 72, 257, 280, 299, 313, 315, 571  
Communication  ...... 57, 201, 221, 248, 273, 278, 
314, 351, 352, 392, 395, 397, 402, 408, 409, 416, 492, 553, 584, 600, 601, 624, 629, 692, 
709 
Commutation  ...........................  52, 96, 135, 136  
Commuted  .................  46, 52, 120, 121, 136, 578  
companies  ....... 10, 608, 611, 613, 614, 629, 705  
Company  ...... 568, 605, 607, 608, 611, 612, 613, 
614, 615, 616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 
623, 624, 625, 626, 6 27, 628, 629, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 
644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
653, 654, 656  
Comparative  ................................ .........  503, 509  
Comparison  .... 63, 115, 144, 186, 192, 214, 292, 
364, 461, 481, 486, 489, 490, 510, 523  
Compassionate  . 95, 96, 1 01, 102, 103, 135, 137, 
139, 489  
Compensation  .. 39, 40, 52, 75, 93, 96, 123, 124, 
135, 140, 151, 171, 207, 239, 240, 242, 256, 
264, 281, 282, 293, 412  
Competent  44, 45, 51, 54, 57, 58, 63, 64, 68, 72, 
75, 76, 82, 101, 103, 108, 109, 114, 116, 
119, 120, 157, 158, 162, 163, 175, 179, 188, 
190, 201, 218, 219, 220, 221, 223, 224, 226, 
229, 256, 262, 269, 270, 278, 306, 327, 389, 
435, 436, 437, 438, 445, 448, 450, 451, 453, 
468, 469, 471, 472, 480, 487, 522, 523, 524, 
525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530, 531, 532, 535, 
539, 540, 541, 557, 572, 580, 588, 595, 600, 
601, 602, 606, 630, 685  
Compilation 38, 39, 40, 69, 79, 83, 97, 150, 151, 
174, 175, 177, 180, 200, 379, 389, 393, 398, 
401, 430, 445, 480, 481, 550, 551, 552, 558, 
672 
Compiled  ................................ ................  68, 444  
Complaint ..................  18, 19, 301, 491,  660, 684  
Complaints  ..... 19, 22, 23, 28, 97, 119, 141, 142, 
156, 178, 236, 241, 246, 267, 268, 283, 284, 
301, 306, 312, 333, 363, 374, 398, 401, 427, 
432, 433, 434, 456, 459, 492, 501, 570, 594, 
675, 676, 677, 680  
Completion ... 24, 53, 55, 56, 63, 64, 69, 90, 105 , 
120, 125, 152, 157, 176, 177, 179, 181, 188, 
190, 191, 194, 196, 206, 208, 209, 210, 214, 
215, 218, 225, 228, 229, 230, 258, 274, 292, 
340, 372, 375, 376, 397, 400, 406, 407, 410, 
425, 437, 438, 445, 453, 458, 469, 479, 481, 
489, 522, 554, 560, 575, 606,  628, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 
645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 
654, 675, 676, 679  
 
 
727 
For internal use of IA&AD  Completion Reports  ................................ ..... 228 
Complexes  ................................ ...........  593, 622  
Compliance  . xxix, xxx, 2, 14, 24, 26, 27, 39, 40, 
70, 138, 140, 150, 151, 155, 157, 178, 1 82, 
185, 186, 187, 196, 199, 216, 233, 236, 245, 
246, 255, 292, 301, 303, 327, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 341, 347, 348, 354, 371, 372, 373, 374, 
375, 378, 380, 381, 393, 394, 396, 401, 454, 
469, 484, 488, 494, 499, 501, 502, 512, 556, 
557, 560, 561, 569, 570, 58 5, 588, 589, 594, 
595, 596, 598, 603, 613, 615, 633, 659, 682, 
694, 709  
Components  ... 76, 244, 246, 353, 421, 426, 429, 
451, 585, 658, 662, 663, 665, 666, 667, 669, 
671, 677, 687, 692  
Composite  ................................ ..............  48, 182  
Compressors ................................ .................  670 
Comptroller  .......................  xxix, xxx, 2, 3, 4, 10  
Comput er ..... 25, 26, 27, 28, 66, 67, 69, 96, 129, 
130, 143, 147, 302, 334, 362, 366, 392, 395, 
398, 403, 405, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 457, 
471, 472, 473, 474, 479, 532, 534, 535, 536, 
556, 577, 661, 687, 689  
Computerization  ... 1, 70, 78, 108, 338, 398, 404, 
584, 609  
Computerized  ..... 2, 41, 66, 69, 70, 74, 246, 273, 
314, 316, 401, 402, 404, 418, 441, 442, 443, 
446, 471, 476, 479, 481, 584, 590  
COM's  ................................ ..........................  297 
Concessionaire  .............................  354, 355, 356  
Concessions 60, 72, 75, 241, 242, 249, 250, 254, 
268, 270, 289, 293  
CONCOR  ..... 277, 286, 611, 616 , 619, 620, 621, 
633, 639  
Concrete Sleeper Plants  ...............................  671 
Condemnation  ...... 425, 430, 431, 432, 433, 450, 
458, 459, 552  
Condemned  .. 435, 448, 461, 468, 530, 541, 660, 
678, 683  
Conference  ... 297, 304, 305, 324, 327, 408, 462, 
550, 556  
Conferences  .......................... 155, 167, 333, 553  
Confi dential  . 25, 26, 28, 30, 119, 545, 563, 573, 
673 
Congestion  ....................  204, 259, 305, 351, 375  
Congress  ................................ ......................  668 
Consignee  ...... 58, 224, 261, 267, 498, 509, 524, 
526, 527, 529, 671  
Consignments . 72, 258, 264, 281, 287, 305, 314, 
342, 354, 568, 569, 572, 580, 581, 668  Consolidate d ..........................  36, 144, 300, 591  
Constitution  ................................ ..............  4, 150  
Construction  ....... 16, 33, 54, 56, 64, 77, 83, 115, 
129, 131, 132, 139, 155, 173, 174, 177, 184, 
185, 189, 193, 197, 205, 206, 210, 214, 215, 
216, 218, 223, 225, 227, 229, 299, 302, 353, 
371, 372, 373, 386, 388, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
396, 397, 398, 413, 425, 437, 448, 468, 522, 
578, 591, 593, 608, 615, 616, 617, 618, 621, 
622, 624, 626, 627, 628, 629, 659, 668, 670, 
690 
Constructions  ................................ . 54, 628, 669  
Consultancy  . 584, 594, 595, 599, 600, 617, 622, 
651, 659, 660, 662, 663, 664, 665 , 667, 668, 
669 
Consultant  ................................ ............  599, 685  
Consultative  ..... 16, 18, 19, 21, 30, 96, 241, 285, 
550, 675, 677, 680  
Consumable  . 162, 213, 215, 216, 292, 346, 462, 
469, 486, 487, 490, 491, 492, 598, 683  
Consumables  152, 153, 156, 159, 378, 556, 669, 
684 
Consumer  ................................ ....... 93, 132, 133 
Consumption  .. 49, 159, 198, 299, 308, 377, 426, 
430, 508, 510, 522, 524, 533, 578, 623  
Container  ...... 247, 257, 286, 323, 354, 355, 365, 
584, 611, 616, 621, 625, 633  
Contingencies  ................................ . 55, 452, 591  
Contingency  .... 36, 201, 408, 489, 490, 493, 685  
Contingency plan  ................................ .........  408 
Contingent  .... 462, 489, 490, 493, 549, 586, 591, 
595, 602, 682  
Continuity  ..... 249, 250, 251, 269, 290, 361, 365  
Continuous  ...... 45, 155, 167, 170, 408, 414, 417  
contra  ................................ .............................  35 
Contract  .... 24, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 152, 160, 170, 
178, 189, 209, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 
224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 230, 236, 246, 256, 
278, 279, 287, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 
335, 336, 343, 374, 377, 379, 394, 401, 405, 
406, 431, 432, 433, 452, 458, 463, 492, 509, 
521, 524, 525, 526, 529, 536, 537, 545, 570, 
578, 579, 589, 594, 596, 600, 601, 608, 622, 
627, 638, 660, 678, 681, 684  
Contractors  ..... 16, 53, 56, 61, 62, 119, 122, 123, 
188, 204, 211, 212, 213, 214, 216, 220, 224, 
228, 241, 287, 313, 374, 407, 435, 463, 511, 
521, 524, 530, 589  
Contracts  .... 53, 56, 57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 168, 190, 
194, 204, 212 , 213, 214, 215, 218, 221, 223, 
INDEX  
 
728 
For internal use of IA&AD  224, 225, 226, 228, 233, 236, 237, 241, 244, 
278, 286, 287, 292, 293, 302, 327, 330, 331, 
332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 343, 346, 347, 374, 
410, 450, 459, 460, 463, 468, 485, 487, 489, 
490, 491, 492, 499, 521, 524, 525, 537, 578,  
579, 591, 593, 598, 600, 601, 617, 633, 679, 
680, 681, 683, 684, 685  
Contribution  ....... 49, 50, 90, 116, 117, 136, 138, 
140, 569, 574, 602, 625  
contributions  ................................ ..........  37, 602  
Contributory  ............................ 37, 116, 117, 123  
Control  ... 19, 38, 42, 55, 67, 102, 128, 132, 150, 
151, 165, 174, 1 84, 186, 197, 230, 259, 298, 
299, 300, 301, 303, 304, 305, 306, 308, 309, 
310, 313, 314, 315, 317, 328, 329, 332, 333, 
342, 344, 345, 346, 349, 350, 352, 360, 362, 
365, 366, 367, 371, 372, 373, 375, 386, 389, 
390, 392, 393, 394, 397, 398, 399, 402, 403, 
408, 409, 424, 425, 429, 440, 444, 448, 449, 
454, 456, 459, 460, 464, 477, 499, 523, 533, 
556, 566, 567, 575, 584, 587, 589, 590, 595, 
596, 605, 607, 608, 618, 619, 621, 623, 659, 
663, 672  
Control Organization  ...................  303, 328, 429  
Controller  . 61, 64, 304, 305, 306, 308, 317, 328, 
345, 352, 365, 440, 527, 537  
Controlling  ................................ .............  44, 114  
Convention  ........................  32, 37, 323, 365, 367  
Conversion  ....... 37, 77, 173, 177, 206, 301, 325, 
380, 406, 413, 428, 436, 624, 625, 626, 668  
Conveyance  ................................ ............  46, 114  
Co-operative ................................ ... 96, 132, 133  
Coordinate  ...........  18, 19, 21, 300 , 305, 393, 556  
Co-ordinating  ................................ ...............  662 
Coordination  .... 16, 32, 102, 132, 150, 174, 295, 
298, 299, 301, 302, 303, 305, 308, 309, 310, 
322, 326, 327, 329, 330, 331, 332, 334, 335, 
336, 349, 389, 393, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 
425, 427, 428, 499, 533, 552, 553, 554, 5 55, 
556, 567, 568, 584, 661, 664, 670  
Core ................................ ......................  693, 694  
CORE  ................................ ...........  106, 372, 515  
Corporate  ...... 353, 553, 562, 584, 613, 617, 618  
Corporation  .... 77, 156, 170, 187, 286, 366, 372, 
502, 584, 611, 612, 616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 
621, 622, 624, 626, 628, 629, 633, 635, 637, 
638, 643, 644, 646, 649, 651, 652, 687  
corpus  ................................ .......................  37, 38  
corridors  ..................  38, 206, 326, 339, 624, 662  
Corrosion  ................................ .............  669, 670  COS  ................................ ...... 320, 427, 440, 558  
Cost .. 24, 43, 54, 56, 58, 61, 66, 68, 77, 81, 114, 
122, 129, 130, 134, 143, 149, 158, 159, 164, 
179, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194 , 195, 196, 
199, 200, 202, 207, 210, 218, 219, 220, 222, 
227, 273, 312, 315, 340, 353, 407, 411, 426, 
435, 436, 437, 438, 442, 444, 446, 447, 448, 
449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 461, 468, 469, 470, 
474, 477, 478, 479, 481, 483, 486, 490, 501, 
519, 520, 522, 528,  537, 540, 545, 546, 569, 
570, 574, 575, 576, 579, 596, 615, 621, 622, 
623, 624, 625, 626, 627, 645, 646, 647, 666  
Cost benefit analysis  ................................ .... 407 
Costing  ..... 40, 60, 173, 179, 180, 200, 201, 474, 
477, 479  
Co-TVM ................................ .......................  272 
Co-TVMs  ................................ .............  241, 272  
Council  .......................... 241, 285, 663, 664, 678  
Couplers  ................................ .......................  661 
Court  .... 19, 20, 22, 25, 41, 60, 63, 94, 128, 137, 
139, 144, 177, 226, 231, 254, 280, 281, 282, 
303, 307, 322, 327, 330, 331, 332, 335, 344, 
396, 407, 462, 489, 493, 545, 558, 571, 572, 
588, 660  
Courts  .............................. 57, 128, 237, 285, 605  
Covered  .... 66, 89, 106, 115, 116, 117, 118, 126, 
131, 153, 157, 183, 188, 200, 224, 238, 258, 
260, 286, 316, 443, 471, 508, 510, 566, 590, 
591, 598, 602, 687  
CPCB  ................................ ...................  454, 464  
CPDE  ................................ ...........................  174 
CPGRAM ................................ .....................  660 
CPGRAMS  ................................ ..................  284 
CPM  ................................ .....................  302, 334  
CPO  ................................ ..........  30, 94, 133, 673  
CPRO  ................................ ...................  237, 670  
CPTM  ...........  295, 297, 301, 303, 327 , 330, 365  
CQAM  ................................ .........................  496 
CRAC  ................................ ..........................  504 
Cranage  ................................ ........................  288 
Crane  ................................ .... 265, 304, 562, 662  
Cranes  ................................  344, 421, 432, 499  
CRB  ................  93, 150, 170, 297, 324, 395, 396  
Creation  .. 24, 27, 93, 94, 95, 137, 139, 155, 177, 
179, 180, 401, 506, 507  
Credit  . 35, 49, 52, 53, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 72, 
73, 74, 85, 88, 90, 121, 132, 133, 141, 142, 
144, 146, 192, 210, 212, 213, 215, 216, 229, 
241, 259, 264, 265, 266, 290, 292, 437, 441, 
445, 446, 448, 451, 461, 462, 469, 476, 477, 
 
 
729 
For internal use of IA&AD  478, 481, 482, 487, 503, 513, 528, 529, 530, 
533, 534, 535, 536, 545, 588, 681,  684 
Credited  .. 37, 49, 53, 63, 69, 190, 229, 272, 445, 
452, 475, 483, 615  
Credits  65, 73, 74, 83, 86, 88, 90, 193, 201, 219, 
232, 291, 406, 438, 441, 468, 476, 482, 534, 
540 
Crew  ....... 45, 108, 113, 114, 298, 306, 309, 311, 
313, 314, 315, 316, 337, 338, 340, 342,  344, 
351, 357, 358, 373, 381, 425, 430, 431, 559  
Crews  ................................ ...........  300, 304, 381  
Crime  ....................  567, 569, 571, 572, 573, 580  
Crimes  ................................ ..........  569, 571, 574  
Criminology  ................................ .................  576 
CRIS  ...... 99, 156, 170, 182, 183, 247, 248, 250, 
255, 300, 302, 317, 333, 334, 361, 362, 363, 
365, 381, 398, 433, 455, 456, 464, 561, 563, 
583, 584, 585, 586, 587, 588, 589, 590  
Criteria  .... xxx, 39, 233, 300, 484, 485, 580, 668  
Crossings  ................................ ........  78, 552, 671  
CRR  ................................ .....................  555, 563  
CRS  ...... 177, 199, 200, 298, 301, 303, 324, 325, 
332, 335, 365, 395, 396, 400, 401, 411, 426, 
430, 431, 432, 464, 550, 551, 552, 555, 556, 
560, 563  
CSO ................................ .......549, 556, 558, 563  
CSR  ...... 184, 342, 365, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 
638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 
647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
CST ................................ ..............  249, 250, 251  
CSTE .............................  388, 394, 396, 556, 563  
CTC ................................ ..............  400, 403, 409  
CTE  ................................ ..............  174, 19 8, 222  
CTNCs  ................................ .........................  311 
CTNL  ............................  303, 308, 346, 349, 365  
CTPM  ...........................  296, 297, 301, 331, 365  
CUG  ................................ .....................  144, 395  
Cultivating  ................................ ...................  235 
Currency  41, 101, 118, 119, 157, 188, 224, 272, 
326, 521  
Current 42, 47, 59, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 77, 81, 90, 
105, 125, 210, 231, 265, 266, 276, 304, 305 , 
306, 309, 314, 329, 342, 357, 359, 403, 409, 
413, 433, 441, 445, 448, 455, 477, 480, 481, 
482, 490, 534, 535, 536, 538, 586, 596, 597  
Curve ................................ ............  184, 185, 186  
Custom  ................................ .........  381, 527, 598  
Custom Duty  ................................ ................  598 
Customer  ...... 164, 240, 242, 243, 248, 258, 262, 
264, 300, 307, 314,  315, 342, 667  Customers  .... 206, 235, 237, 241, 242, 246, 248, 
255, 263, 267, 283, 284, 305, 312, 314, 403, 
409, 498, 625  
Customs  ................................ .......................  527 
Cut Motions  ................................ .................  551 
CVC  ..............  17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 28, 30, 523  
CVO  ................................ ...........  18, 20, 30, 496  
CWE  ................................ .... 424, 427, 428, 464  
CWIP  ................................ ...........................  614 
CWM  .... 160, 161, 170 , 181, 424, 434, 450, 452  
Cycle  .... 129, 293, 342, 429, 460, 489, 493, 495, 
687, 692  
Cyclone  ................................ ........................  408 
Cyclostyled  ................... 118, 157, 188, 435, 602  
CYM  ................................ ............................  365 
CYMs  ................................ ...........................  311 
D 
D&AR  ........................... 306, 365, 396, 554, 557  
DA ...............  41, 43, 50, 110, 116, 117, 145, 439  
DAI ...........  3, 5, 6, 11, 56, 57, 75, 202, 379, 5 11 
Daily  .... 44, 71, 85, 86, 114, 249, 269, 270, 289, 
290, 315, 352, 456, 459, 475, 500, 503, 507, 
509, 510, 531, 546, 580, 581  
Damage  .. 75, 111, 201, 260, 264, 282, 292, 341, 
511, 525, 527, 545, 546  
Damages ....... 224, 299, 313, 341, 343, 347, 458, 
459, 462, 524, 633,  634, 635, 636, 637, 639, 
640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 
649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
DAR  . 19, 30, 316, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 
335, 336, 338, 551, 552, 553, 563  
Data  ...... 145, 146, 181, 186, 244, 248, 254, 286, 
317, 318, 319, 328, 375, 378, 380, 381, 398, 
402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 408, 409, 434, 551  
Data logger  ................................ ... 400, 403, 409  
Data Module  ................................ ................  359 
Day book  ................................ ......................  461 
DC traction  ................................ ...................  665 
DCM  ................................ ................  19, 30, 237  
Dead  ..... 25, 26, 27, 28, 138, 140, 162, 187, 214, 
215, 298, 313, 343, 462, 485, 487, 488, 489, 
490, 491, 492, 493,  495, 519  
Dead stock .. 25, 26, 27, 462, 487, 488, 492, 495, 
675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 683, 684, 
685 
Dearness  ....................  43, 50, 109, 110, 112, 135  
Death  ................................ ..............  51, 103, 136  
INDEX  
 
730 
For internal use of IA&AD  debit  ..... 35, 36, 69, 70, 74, 85, 90, 98, 193, 265, 
266, 276, 280, 445, 448, 482, 483, 513, 533, 
535, 536  
Debited  ....... 37, 53, 59, 121, 190, 193, 231, 232, 
279, 471, 477, 483, 528, 596  
Debits  . 65, 68, 69, 73, 74, 86, 88, 177, 199, 265, 
266, 267, 276, 280, 281, 293, 441, 444, 445, 
446, 460, 461, 476, 482, 533, 534, 535, 536  
Debroy  ................................ .........................  205 
Debt Head  ................................ ..............  83, 413  
Debtor s ................................ .................  595, 597  
Dedicated  ..............  339, 341, 611, 618, 625, 637  
DEE ................................ ..............................  311 
De-escalation  ................................ ...............  521 
Defacement  ................................ ............  60, 232  
Defaulting  ...............  58, 226, 487, 525, 551, 685  
Defective  ................................ ................  89, 581  
Defects  ..... 83, 91, 182, 185, 189, 256, 426, 428, 
458, 459, 460, 524, 525, 527, 561, 568  
Defence  ................................ ..................  84, 451  
Defense ................................ ........................  659 
Deficiencies  . 167, 292, 347, 524, 525, 527, 538, 
540, 554, 557, 558, 561, 589, 590, 598  
Delhi  xxix, xxx, 7, 156, 170, 187, 238, 300, 372, 
413, 466, 502, 583, 605, 611, 617, 618, 621, 
622, 659, 696, 706  
Delinking  ................................ .....................  688 
Delisted  ................................ ................  676, 677  
Delisting  ................................ .......................  661 
Delivery  314, 500, 501, 507, 509, 525, 530, 531, 
532, 544, 546  
Demand  ...... 32, 77, 79, 244, 247, 257, 314, 316, 
377, 405, 412, 413, 507, 508, 509, 510  
Demands  ...... 280, 404, 433, 507, 508, 509, 510, 
551, 606  
DEMANDS  ................................ ..................  321 
Demands Payable  ................................ ..... 35, 87  
Demands Recoverable  ...........................  35, 280 
Demotions  ................................ ..............  96, 124  
Demurrage  . 73, 74, 75, 236, 238, 240, 242, 244, 
247, 255, 258, 261, 262, 263, 265, 266, 267, 
272, 276, 279, 288, 291, 293, 315, 347, 441, 
545 
Department ..... 16, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
30, 33, 38, 39, 40, 49, 51, 64, 67, 79, 81, 8 2, 
84, 93, 94, 97, 108, 114, 118, 129, 133, 137, 
149, 155, 156, 157, 160, 161, 165, 166, 170, 
173, 178, 182, 183, 187, 188, 203, 223, 230, 
232, 233, 235, 236, 238, 239, 245, 246, 255, 
262, 264, 268, 269, 275, 281, 283, 284, 285, 286, 295, 300, 303, 309, 31 1, 321, 340, 365, 
369, 370, 372, 373, 377, 378, 386, 393, 394, 
397, 399, 401, 403, 404, 408, 410, 411, 421, 
422, 424, 425, 427, 428, 429, 433, 434, 435, 
436, 437, 441, 443, 451, 458, 459, 462, 464, 
468, 475, 476, 478, 484, 485, 486, 488, 489, 
490, 491, 493 , 494, 498, 499, 501, 502, 506, 
511, 519, 520, 521, 527, 528, 529, 531, 542, 
543, 555, 556, 558, 564, 570, 574, 575, 577, 
578, 579, 580, 601, 689  
Departmental  .... 17, 19, 21, 25, 26, 27, 125, 127, 
135, 149, 158, 163, 187, 189, 190, 202, 211, 
215, 216, 219, 227 , 236, 298, 308, 321, 325, 
350, 375, 399, 406, 461, 462, 470, 476, 478, 
486, 490, 491, 492, 493, 507, 536, 538, 540, 
544, 551, 561, 618, 682  
Departments  . 1, 2, 12, 16, 17, 38, 41, 46, 63, 64, 
66, 79, 80, 81, 107, 109, 119, 167, 168, 178, 
179, 189, 192, 194,  204, 210, 213, 218, 228, 
238, 264, 295, 298, 299, 300, 303, 309, 310, 
313, 317, 327, 336, 344, 369, 378, 380, 383, 
384, 391, 397, 403, 406, 417, 421, 424, 425, 
427, 429, 430, 436, 448, 449, 451, 453, 458, 
459, 466, 467, 468, 470, 477, 478, 484, 499, 
500, 518, 533, 534, 538, 544, 549, 550, 552, 
554, 557, 577, 578, 584, 659, 667, 674, 692, 
693, 694  
Departure  ................................ ..... 319, 359, 363  
Deployment  .. 152, 160, 161, 198, 199, 340, 421, 
493, 569, 575, 581, 658, 685  
Deposit  ....... 49, 54, 58, 62, 65, 84, 88, 107, 176, 
178, 189, 190, 19 2, 197, 209, 210, 216, 221, 
224, 274, 277, 278, 279, 397, 400, 405, 481, 
503, 524, 525, 526, 530, 532, 536, 545, 600, 
601, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 
642, 643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
653, 654  
Deposits  ..............  84, 87, 88, 208, 439, 475, 595  
Deposits Miscellaneous  ...............................  439 
Depot  ...... 65, 198, 318, 364, 365, 405, 424, 429, 
433, 439, 451, 452, 455, 456, 486, 487, 498, 
499, 500, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 514, 519, 
526, 529, 531, 532, 533, 534, 537, 538, 543, 
544, 545, 546, 672, 683  
Depots  .. 198, 277, 304, 35 5, 424, 427, 428, 431, 
439, 440, 441, 449, 453, 454, 458, 459, 476, 
499, 500, 503, 506, 527, 529, 536, 540, 544, 
555, 556, 559, 616, 671  
 
 
731 
For internal use of IA&AD  Depreciation  . 36, 37, 66, 69, 77, 81, 82, 84, 193, 
200, 412, 435, 436, 437, 445, 446, 452, 467, 
468, 477, 478, 533, 534,  595, 608  
Deputation  .... 109, 115, 116, 396, 567, 570, 576, 
622 
Deputy  .. 5, 17, 30, 170, 174, 301, 302, 305, 365, 
372, 392, 424, 464, 494, 558, 563, 621  
Derailment  ................................ ...................  353 
Design  .. 152, 174, 175, 176, 183, 187, 220, 312, 
321, 351, 361, 362, 365, 389, 396, 402, 425, 
436, 460, 464, 523, 564, 584, 587, 628, 658, 
659, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 666, 667, 668, 
670, 675, 709  
Designs  .. 58, 100, 174, 225, 406, 425, 426, 429, 
430, 658, 661, 662, 664, 667, 668  
Despatch  ................................ ..............  544, 688  
Destination  ..... 71, 259, 267, 272, 281, 309, 342, 
351, 359  
Detailed  .. 76, 184, 186, 201, 218, 246, 277, 433, 
467, 537, 574  
Detailed Estimate  ................................ .........  218 
Detailed head  ................................ . 77, 574, 615  
Detailed heads  ................................ ................  36 
Detection  ....... 166, 197, 254, 357, 566, 574, 665  
Detention  ...... 113, 186, 259, 261, 262, 263, 274, 
279, 304, 305, 306, 307, 310, 312, 315 , 318, 
319, 324, 328, 329, 337, 340, 341, 347, 348, 
352, 355, 356, 364, 375, 376, 457, 460  
Development  2, 9, 17, 36, 37, 38, 69, 72, 77, 82, 
84, 86, 95, 106, 130, 157, 175, 193, 200, 
204, 205, 236, 237, 242, 243, 244, 255, 270, 
295, 297, 361, 362, 366, 372 , 381, 393, 397, 
398, 402, 421, 429, 445, 456, 482, 488, 504, 
512, 514, 520, 521, 523, 545, 560, 584, 593, 
599, 600, 601, 605, 606, 612, 617, 618, 619, 
620, 622, 623, 624, 627, 628, 629, 632, 643, 
649, 658, 659, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 666, 
667, 668, 669,  670, 671, 675, 676  
Device  ................................ ..........................  552 
DF .....................  39, 63, 77, 78, 79, 82, 228, 412  
DFCCIL  ................................ ....... 395, 396, 618  
DGA  ..............  466, 611, 614, 615, 693, 694, 695  
DGS&D  ................................ ..............  499, 503  
DGTD  ................................ ..........................  521 
Diabetes  ................................ .......................  165 
Diagrams  ............................... 344, 390, 396, 397  
Diesel 80, 81, 365, 373, 380, 421, 424, 425, 426, 
427, 428, 464, 466, 496, 515, 611, 661, 662, 
663 
Diesel locomotives  ...............................  426, 662  Diesel -electric  ................................ ..............  662 
Diesel -hydraulic  ................................ ...........  662 
Diet ...............  153, 162, 163, 167, 491, 684, 685  
Digital  ...............  3, 178, 246, 264, 502, 506, 687  
Dignitaries  ................................ ..............  18, 552  
Direct  ..... 61, 66, 67, 79, 95, 104, 119, 125, 220, 
260, 30 0, 309, 424, 438, 440, 442, 443, 444, 
446, 447, 472, 473, 476, 477, 478, 480, 481, 
502, 509, 524, 568, 682  
Director  .. 3, 5, 12, 13, 17, 33, 93, 100, 147, 149, 
160, 170, 236, 395, 413, 464, 466, 496, 521, 
549, 563, 567, 569, 584, 611, 616, 617, 618, 
619, 622,  624, 626, 627, 628, 629, 659, 670, 
672, 673, 706  
Director General .......3, 5, 12, 13, 395, 466, 567, 
659, 706  
Directorate  ..... 17, 137, 180, 284, 295, 297, 321, 
322, 324, 326, 372, 426, 427, 430, 452, 549, 
551, 553, 584, 660, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 
666, 667, 668, 669, 670, 671, 672, 673, 675, 
676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 682, 683  
Directorates  ............................  33, 321, 425, 552  
Directors . 33, 149, 322, 370, 422, 498, 549, 616, 
617, 618, 619, 623, 624, 625, 633, 659  
Disaster  347, 361, 397, 404, 408, 421, 428, 430, 
431, 432, 552, 553, 555,  557, 558, 559, 561, 
562, 563, 569, 574  
Disasters  ................................ ...............  408, 574  
Disbursement  .......................  175, 204, 607, 672  
disbursements  .......................  83, 84, 86, 87, 204  
Disciplines  ................................ .....................  18 
Disclosure  ................................ .... 586, 591, 615  
Disclosures  ................................ ...................  587 
Discounts  ................................ ..... 633, 642, 643  
Discrepancy  ................................ .................  483 
Dismantled  ................................ .............  61, 195  
Dispensaries  ................................ . 160, 161, 167  
Disposal  25, 26, 27, 63, 120, 141, 142, 149, 155, 
159, 166, 174, 175, 194, 209, 215, 216, 225, 
227, 229, 284, 289, 301, 327, 331, 332, 333, 
346, 347, 393, 429, 451, 454, 461, 463, 486, 
487, 498, 499, 500, 501, 506, 510, 528, 540, 
544, 545, 546, 561, 569, 571, 572,573, 574, 
578, 581, 596, 607, 660, 661, 672, 678, 682, 
683, 684  
Distressed  ................................ .....................  196 
distribution  . 9, 68, 131, 200, 298, 308, 313, 314, 
325, 329, 342, 369, 371, 398, 425, 444, 477, 
478, 480, 488, 495, 544, 608, 682, 683  
INDEX  
 
732 
For internal use of IA&AD  Distribution  .. 168, 323, 3 69, 371, 373, 395, 407, 
431, 458, 493, 529  
Dividend  ................................ ..........  32, 82, 452  
Division  ...... 16, 19, 21, 120, 151, 174, 175, 190, 
199, 238, 283, 285, 296, 304, 305, 309, 316, 
319, 371, 389, 397, 424, 428, 440, 456, 457, 
458, 499, 500, 507, 555, 557, 562, 567, 568, 
613, 662, 6 90 
Divisional  . 16, 17, 19, 21, 26, 30, 33, 39, 40, 83, 
90, 94, 99, 119, 128, 130, 132, 133, 139, 
140, 142, 149, 160, 161, 167, 170, 171, 174, 
190, 193, 195, 197, 209, 210, 237, 240, 241, 
247, 256, 267, 285, 298, 299, 300, 302, 303, 
304, 305, 306, 307, 309, 311, 315, 316, 317, 
318, 319, 320, 330, 331, 333, 334, 340, 344, 
358, 359, 365, 370, 371, 381, 388, 391, 392, 
393, 394, 395, 396, 398, 399, 409, 424, 428, 
456, 458, 498, 499, 539, 549, 550, 554, 557, 
558, 561, 562, 563, 567, 571, 573, 574, 606, 
673, 690  
Divisional Commercial Manager  ...........  30, 237  
Divisions  .... 16, 17, 21, 28, 33, 79, 81, 119, 131, 
132, 133, 141, 142, 150, 174, 178, 179, 180, 
182, 197, 198, 210, 237, 238, 241, 246, 284, 
286, 298, 299, 302, 303, 305, 309, 310, 317, 
328, 329, 330, 334, 336, 345, 394, 39 7, 409, 
431, 459, 499, 554, 556, 557, 558, 569  
DLW  ..... 427, 428, 464, 466, 472, 496, 515, 519  
DME  ................................ .....311, 424, 428, 458  
DMO  ................................ .....149, 159, 170, 171  
DMU  ................................ ............  324, 365, 464  
DMW  ....................  427, 428, 466, 472, 496, 611  
Doctors  ....................  46, 156, 160, 167, 169, 684  
Document Cost  ................................ ............  502 
Documentation  ..... 204, 246, 341, 362, 522, 526, 
662 
Documented  ................................ . 361, 440, 523  
Documents  ... 19, 22, 51, 54, 57, 60, 66, 74, 102, 
108, 127, 180, 181, 199, 221, 225, 229, 232, 
266, 274, 278, 290, 316, 319, 344, 438, 442, 
470, 472, 502, 503, 523, 528, 553, 606, 615, 
692 
Dog squad  ................................ ............  493, 580  
Dog squads  ................................ ...........  570, 580  
Dogs  ................................ .....................  567, 580  
DOM  ................................ .....303, 304, 305, 343  
DOPT  ................................ .......................  30, 52  
Dormitories  ................................ ..........  286, 379  
DOT  ................................ .............  302, 333, 365  
Double  ................................ ..................  323, 625  Doubling  ...................  37, 77, 177, 218, 301, 413  
Doubtful  ........................ 20, 24, 26, 28, 597, 608  
DP ................................ ................................  509 
DPC  ................................ ..........................  4, 585  
Draft  ..... 145, 301, 328, 329, 333, 343, 3 45, 347, 
349, 350, 351, 353, 356, 359, 363, 485, 507, 
688 
Draft Para  ................................ .......................  14 
Drawal  ................................ ......................  42, 48  
Drawing  . 48, 117, 174, 175, 182, 183, 184, 189, 
331, 389, 426  
Drawings  .. 53, 57, 152, 176, 210, 218, 220, 221, 
397, 406, 427, 661, 665, 675, 677, 679  
DRF  .........................  56, 63, 77, 78, 81,  228, 412  
Drill  ............................... 408, 555, 558, 559, 562  
Drills  ............................. 555, 558, 559, 562, 574  
DRM  .... 16, 26, 27, 30, 160, 161, 170, 174, 179, 
181, 237, 307, 311, 344, 371, 396, 424, 557, 
558, 563, 567  
DRR  ................................ ..... 500, 509, 510, 546  
DRUCC  . 16, 19, 21, 30, 241, 285, 331, 365, 556  
DSC  ................................ ......................  688, 689  
DSF ................................ ................................  77 
DSO  ................................ .............  549, 550, 563  
DSTE  ................................ ...................  394, 398  
Dump  ................................ .............................  71 
Duplicate  ................................ ......................  250 
Duty  ..... 42, 44, 45, 50, 108, 111, 113, 115, 116, 
121, 123, 124, 130, 163, 230, 259, 289, 304, 
305, 307, 315, 317, 324, 343, 358, 391, 425, 
462, 471, 490, 493, 545, 553, 575, 581, 589, 
608, 683, 685  
Dy CMDs  ................................ .....................  149 
Dy FA&CAOs  ................................ ...............  33 
Dy. . 18, 20, 33, 39, 94, 133, 139, 174, 214, 215, 
236, 237, 302, 305, 306, 329, 345, 346, 371, 
388, 424, 429, 464, 477, 496, 499, 549, 555, 
556, 563  
Dy. CCM (CP)  ................................ .............  237 
Dy. CCO  ................................ ......................  237 
Dy. Chief Materials Managers  .....................  499 
Dy. CME  ................................ ...... 477, 496, 5 63 
Dy. COM  ................................ ..... 302, 556, 563  
Dy. CPO  ................................ .........................  94 
Dynamometer  ................................ ....... 665, 678  
E 
Earnest Money  ...... 221, 279, 405, 502, 503, 524  
Earnings  ... 35, 36, 47, 70, 71, 74, 75, 77, 86, 88, 
90, 144, 192, 208, 210, 238, 240, 243, 244, 
 
 
733 
For internal use of IA&AD  245, 247, 249, 254, 265, 268, 280, 287, 289, 
298, 315, 316, 3 38, 363, 462, 498, 591, 594, 
660 
Earthwork  ................................  61, 62, 192, 669  
East Coast  ................................ ........................  7 
Eastern  ................  7, 13, 301, 371, 554, 557, 558  
e-Auction  ..............  156, 187, 314, 320, 499, 502  
EBR ................................ . 36, 37, 77, 79, 84, 619  
EC ................................ ................  583, 584, 590  
Economic  ..... 175, 295, 372, 389, 428, 450, 484, 
500, 523, 617, 6 24 
Economies  ................................ ....................  663 
economy  ....... 14, 32, 38, 66, 295, 307, 310, 348, 
382, 383, 384, 414, 426, 427, 443, 460, 471, 
520, 531  
ED .............  39, 99, 113, 147, 170, 370, 548, 563  
EDEE  ................................ ...........................  370 
edition  ................................ ..................  1, 2, 696  
e-Drishti  ................................ .......................  314 
Education  .. 41, 94, 111, 112, 145, 155, 167, 682  
Educational  ... 103, 104, 105, 112, 133, 575, 651  
effectiveness ................................ ....... 5, 14, 402  
Efficiency  . 5, 14, 63, 66, 84, 201, 205, 228, 263, 
285, 292, 295, 297, 307, 310, 312, 317, 324, 
343, 348, 350, 351, 376, 377, 381, 404, 443, 
471, 518, 520, 596, 662, 663, 667, 673, 687  
Efficient  ................................ ..94, 343, 376, 389  
Effluent  ................................ ........................  464 
eFile  ................................ ..............................  687 
EI 400, 403  
Electric  ... 80, 297, 314, 323, 365, 369, 370, 371, 
373, 378, 381, 421, 428, 441, 464, 471, 477, 
478, 490, 492, 499, 515, 542, 663, 664, 673, 
682, 683  
Electric locomotives ..... 369, 370, 371, 373, 542, 
663 
Electric m ultiple unit ................................ .... 663 
Electrical  .... 49, 78, 80, 218, 302, 333, 357, 365, 
369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 378, 380, 394, 397, 
410, 424, 425, 427, 429, 464, 490, 496, 549, 
557, 584, 662, 663, 670, 673, 683  
Electrical Directorate  ................................ ... 663 
Electricity  .. 48, 49, 108, 144, 370, 373, 378, 478  
Electrification . 78, 341, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 
395, 406, 413  
Electronic  . 21, 99, 340, 386, 401, 409, 432, 496, 
502, 555, 617, 688, 690, 692, 708  
Electronic payments  ................................ ..... 502 
Elongation  ................................ ....................  196 
EMD  ................................ .....221, 224, 405, 503  EMDs  ... 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640 , 641, 
642, 643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
653, 654  
Emergencies  ................................ ... 43, 574, 575  
Emergency  ... 151, 154, 159, 164, 184, 199, 301, 
303, 326, 328, 329, 333, 346, 347, 350, 362, 
390, 392, 403, 408, 520, 524, 525, 552, 556, 
561 
Emolument  ................................ .....................  51 
Empanelled  .. 161, 63 3, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 
639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 
650, 652, 653, 654  
Empanelment  ................................ ....... 161, 636  
Empirical  ................................ ......................  401 
Employees  24, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 52, 53, 93, 96, 99, 100, 106, 107, 109, 
110, 112, 115, 117, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 
125, 127, 128, 129, 131, 133, 137, 139, 145, 
146, 149, 151, 153, 154, 161, 163, 167, 168, 
171, 177, 401, 453, 467, 494, 530, 550, 577, 
585, 598, 621, 623, 624, 670, 672, 684, 689, 
690 
Employment  ........  45, 94, 96, 124, 163, 366, 471  
Empties  212, 213, 29 2, 303, 304, 305, 308, 349, 
487, 490, 491, 492  
Empty  ............................ 247, 305, 315, 355, 578  
EMU  ...... 80, 324, 338, 365, 373, 380, 425, 429, 
464, 663, 676  
Encashment  ................................ ..............  53, 81  
Encroachments  ................................ ..... 197, 599  
Encryption  ................................ ....................  506 
Energy  ...... 48, 81, 370, 373, 377, 379, 426, 454, 
491, 542, 543, 584, 6 12, 623, 643  
Engagement  . 105, 106, 128, 137, 139, 143, 160, 
161, 209, 288, 291, 347, 471, 570, 579  
Engg.  ................................ ....................  396, 670  
Engine  .. 199, 244, 262, 299, 307, 309, 311, 312, 
316, 337, 344, 345, 346, 348, 350, 352, 353, 
359, 366, 375, 661, 662, 675  
Engineer  ....... 173, 174, 198 , 210, 211, 214, 215, 
365, 370, 371, 372, 386, 391, 392, 393, 398, 
399, 424, 427, 428, 464, 470, 474, 476, 489, 
490, 496, 563, 564, 680  
Engineering  2, 9, 17, 48, 79, 157, 170, 173, 175, 
178, 182, 183, 185, 186, 187, 188, 194, 203, 
208, 209, 211, 213, 215, 216, 218, 223, 227, 
232, 233, 295, 303, 306, 335, 336, 337, 339, 
353, 365, 370, 375, 379, 380, 390, 391, 394, 
398, 399, 410, 411, 422, 424, 425, 427, 428, 
INDEX  
 
734 
For internal use of IA&AD  434, 459, 464, 466, 478, 489, 506, 549, 556, 
578, 584, 593, 658, 669, 702  
Engineers  ..... 174, 193, 371, 37 2, 373, 392, 393, 
398, 424  
Engines  299, 307, 344, 347, 348, 351, 352, 375, 
453, 543  
Enquiry  .. 30, 236, 320, 354, 366, 522, 554, 557, 
562 
enterprise  ................................ .... 3, 35, 254, 708  
Enterprises  .... 508, 521, 611, 612, 620, 629, 650  
Entities  ..........................  215, 300, 371, 372, 501  
Entity ................................ ....................  484, 659  
entrusted  ... 3, 5, 10, 75, 303, 336, 372, 390, 466, 
551, 566, 593, 595, 598, 611, 665  
Entrustment  ................................ .. 594, 599, 600  
Environment .. 357, 358, 362, 378, 453, 454, 458  
Environmental  ...... 154, 378, 430, 431, 432, 459, 
486, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495  
e-Office  ................................ .... 3, 660, 687, 690  
E-Payment  ................................ ....................  248 
EPF ................................ ......................  219, 225  
E-Procurement  .............................  314, 320, 506  
EPS ................................ ..............  314, 320, 502  
Equipment  ...... 25, 27, 28, 61, 80, 154, 156, 157, 
158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 168, 170, 196, 
220, 222, 273, 312, 315, 343, 360, 371, 373, 
375, 388, 389, 390, 392, 395, 396, 397,  398, 
399, 400, 402, 403, 405, 408, 412, 428, 431, 
432, 436, 450, 454, 463, 478, 492, 524, 525, 
527, 553, 570, 574, 580, 584, 589, 591, 605, 
614, 617, 625, 658, 659, 662, 663, 664, 665, 
666, 670, 671, 672, 679, 682, 683, 684  
Equitable  ................................ .57, 189, 477, 523  
ERC  ................................ ......................  184, 671  
Error  ....... 67, 256, 262, 265, 266, 267, 276, 280, 
290, 291, 444, 473  
Errors  ..............................  67, 444, 473, 481, 587  
Escalation  ................................ .....................  521 
Escalator  ................................ ......................  379 
Escorting  ................................ ......................  575 
ESI ................................ .......................  219, 225  
ESS ................................ ..............................  585 
Established  ..... 57, 164, 221, 239, 267, 281, 285, 
371, 372, 521, 523, 583, 590, 600, 601, 60 5, 
622, 625, 658  
Establishment  ... 33, 40, 41, 81, 93, 97, 118, 147, 
301, 304, 313, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 
335, 336, 412, 429, 434, 459, 461, 483, 673  
Estate ................................ ........  19, 22, 197, 681  Estimate  54, 55, 61, 63, 152, 157, 176, 188, 190, 
192, 200, 203, 218, 219, 220 , 227, 229, 230, 
232, 399, 406, 407, 411, 437, 458, 468, 469, 
481, 489, 490, 500, 512, 524, 545, 546, 595  
Estimates  ...... 32, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 63, 69, 150, 
151, 152, 157, 174, 175, 176, 188, 189, 190, 
191, 201, 202, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215, 
216, 218, 219 , 221, 228, 229, 232, 323, 375, 
388, 389, 398, 399, 407, 410, 425, 426, 430, 
435, 436, 445, 447, 448, 453, 467, 468, 469, 
481, 606, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 
640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 
651, 652, 653, 654, 672, 675, 676, 679  
Estim ation  ..... 177, 299, 313, 401, 431, 458, 670  
E-Tender  ................................ ..............  502, 507  
E-Ticketing  ................................ ..........  236, 617  
eTour  ................................ ....................  687, 690  
Evaluation  .... 141, 142, 204, 207, 222, 311, 349, 
354, 360, 429, 442, 474, 503, 589, 663  
Examination  . 102, 141, 142, 163, 186, 232, 289, 
303, 308, 319, 336, 359, 363, 366, 381, 396, 
551, 552  
Examinations  ................................ . 46, 336, 569  
Exception  .......................... 41, 42, 111, 146, 181  
Execution  ... 55, 56, 58, 174, 175, 179, 190, 194, 
196, 199, 200, 204, 212, 213, 218, 219, 224, 
225, 230, 246, 303, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 
334, 335, 336, 338, 372, 374, 388, 38 9, 392, 
393, 398, 411, 452, 469, 524, 579, 600, 601, 
625, 629  
Executive  13, 17, 33, 40, 93, 147, 149, 170, 173, 
174, 181, 201, 222, 226, 236, 237, 370, 403, 
422, 453, 464, 466, 484, 498, 504, 505, 522, 
537, 540, 549, 563, 583, 590, 593, 605, 619, 
620, 621,  622, 623, 659, 670, 672, 673  
Executives  ................................ ..............  14, 504  
Expenditure  .... 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 32, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 40, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 63, 64, 68, 69, 76, 
77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 
112, 118, 128, 131, 137, 138, 139, 140, 150, 
155, 156, 157, 158, 15 9, 167, 168, 174, 178, 
188, 189, 190, 192, 196, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204, 208, 214, 215, 218, 219, 227, 228, 229, 
230, 231, 232, 233, 259, 311, 342, 373, 374, 
379, 380, 383, 384, 389, 399, 401, 406, 411, 
412, 413, 433, 434, 435, 437, 442, 444, 445, 
446, 447 , 448, 449, 452, 458, 462, 468, 469, 
477, 479, 481, 483, 484, 485, 489, 490, 493, 
495, 501, 512, 513, 523, 526, 559, 560, 566, 
570, 579, 580, 586, 588, 589, 594, 595, 596, 
 
 
735 
For internal use of IA&AD  597, 598, 602, 606, 607, 608, 615, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642,  643, 
644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
653, 654, 660, 672  
Expenses  54, 70, 79, 80, 81, 110, 111, 114, 142, 
143, 150, 292, 477, 478, 574, 597, 598, 638, 
645, 646, 647  
Experimental  ................................  675, 676, 679  
Expunction  ................................ ...........  569, 571  
Extant  .... 109, 129, 134, 230, 258,  270, 381, 468  
Extra  .... 32, 37, 47, 110, 120, 287, 337, 393, 619  
extra -budgetary  ................................ ..............  36 
F 
FA&CAO  ................................ ....... 39, 131, 464  
FA&CAOs  ................................ ..... 33, 524, 529  
FAA  ................................ ...............................  13 
Fabrication  ............................ 513, 530, 532, 668  
facilitate  ... 2, 3, 32, 76, 305, 433, 455, 474, 621, 
625, 709  
Factories  ..........................  93, 124, 439, 453, 454  
Factory  . 151, 191, 262, 366, 425, 427, 446, 471, 
474, 477, 478, 496, 510, 611, 623  
Faculty  ................................ .................  407, 408  
Failure  .... 58, 111, 199, 202, 216, 224, 233, 248, 
345, 354, 356, 375, 390, 391, 405, 473, 536, 
541, 576, 579, 603, 660, 661, 669, 677  
Failures  ................................ ........................  391 
Family  51, 96, 98, 135, 136, 150, 154, 165, 168, 
202, 690  
Fare . 71, 239, 242, 268, 276, 280, 282, 289, 608  
Fares  ................  71, 235, 240, 241, 268, 289, 290  
FAS ................................ ..............................  585 
Fastenings  ................................ ............  192, 665  
Fatigue  ................................ .........  665, 669, 678  
Feasibility  ..... 157, 175, 188, 285, 406, 599, 651  
features  ..... 2, 12, 32, 38, 75, 20 3, 247, 248, 304, 
316, 338, 434, 469, 502, 506, 513  
Festivals  ................................ ...............  154, 166  
Fibre  ................................ .............  392, 409, 618  
Fictitious  ................................ ..............  232, 470  
File3, 24, 26, 180, 282, 343, 344, 404, 509, 510, 
545, 558, 615, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 
681, 683, 687, 688, 689  
Files .... 25, 26, 27, 138, 14 0, 182, 212, 287, 292, 
327, 335, 344, 458, 462, 485, 487, 488, 490, 
491, 493, 495, 519, 545, 546, 558, 568, 675, 
676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 683, 684, 685, 
688, 689, 690  
Final Bills  ................................ ..... 190, 223, 410  Final Modification  .......................  177, 328, 401  
Finance  ... 6, 9, 12, 17, 32,  33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
76, 77, 83, 88, 97, 98, 107, 118, 129, 130, 
157, 170, 188, 195, 205, 404, 411, 413, 421, 
422, 433, 435, 452, 503, 505, 584, 585, 601, 
611, 616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 624, 
629, 672, 704  
Finances  ................................ ...................  17, 32  
Financial  xxix, xxx, 2 , 13, 32, 33, 35, 38, 39, 53, 
61, 64, 76, 83, 87, 89, 90, 96, 97, 99, 100, 
104, 105, 118, 125, 126, 128, 129, 137, 142, 
149, 150, 157, 168, 174, 175, 179, 188, 189, 
200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 216, 218, 219, 232, 
233, 256, 267, 277, 280, 311, 328, 356, 359, 
377, 379, 381, 389, 394, 421, 422, 434, 435, 
437, 451, 460, 464, 479, 484, 490, 496, 503, 
514, 515, 516, 517, 523, 524, 537, 541, 542, 
556, 560, 568, 584, 585, 586, 587, 588, 590, 
591, 594, 595, 596, 597, 598, 599, 600, 601, 
602, 603, 605, 606, 607, 608, 60 9, 613, 614, 
615, 619, 620, 621, 623, 627, 628, 638, 656, 
659, 660, 672, 675, 676, 679, 694, 700, 703, 
709 
Financial Commissioner  ..................  17, 32, 619  
Fire ................  360, 553, 568, 574, 578, 661, 683  
Firefighting  ................................ ..................  493 
Fish ................................ ...... 183, 184, 185, 186  
Fittings  . 214, 302, 333, 346, 427, 434, 580, 681, 
682 
Five Year  ...........................  297, 323, 421, 422  
Fixation  .. 25, 26, 27, 42, 95, 125, 138, 140, 211, 
239, 425, 438, 472, 483, 488, 494, 545, 577, 
681, 685  
Fixed  ...... 42, 48, 49, 66, 99, 111, 115, 127, 128, 
160, 162, 163, 164, 196, 198, 203, 206, 218, 
255, 257, 271,  279, 295, 350, 376, 392, 403, 
407, 435, 438, 454, 462, 472, 478, 483, 521, 
523, 525, 526, 527, 528, 533, 534, 540, 584, 
595, 596, 597, 598, 608, 609  
flag ................................ 239, 273, 434, 695, 697  
Flaw  ................................ .............................  665 
Flood  ................................ ............................  408 
FMM  ................................ ............................  314 
Fog ................................ ...............................  552 
FOIS  ....... xxx, 41, 70, 71, 72, 73, 244, 246, 24 7, 
248, 258, 260, 298, 300, 301, 302, 305, 309, 
314, 315, 316, 317, 322, 333, 334, 341, 342, 
354, 364, 365, 395, 404  
FOISnet  ................................ ........................  314 
INDEX  
 
736 
For internal use of IA&AD  Follow up  . 25, 26, 166, 168, 256, 395, 396, 397, 
550, 553, 561, 577, 670  
Foot over  ............................... 200, 237, 243, 283  
Foot-plate  ................................ .....................  390 
Force 93, 1 26, 365, 563, 566, 567, 568, 569, 577  
Forecast  ... 97, 303, 304, 305, 315, 317, 345, 531  
Foreign  ... 66, 107, 116, 136, 137, 139, 220, 265, 
269, 291, 316, 320, 329, 520, 521, 534, 535, 
591, 602, 621, 664  
Foreign exchange  .........................  220, 521, 621  
Format  ................................ ..........  585, 586, 594  
Forwardi ng ................................ ...................  253 
Framed 41, 53, 57, 103, 124, 254, 281, 284, 295, 
297, 568, 588, 669  
Fraud  .... 105, 204, 254, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 
334, 335, 336, 343, 346, 347, 374, 462  
Free .. 73, 75, 115, 255, 257, 258, 261, 262, 263, 
270, 287, 356, 360, 527, 528, 531, 541, 545  
Freight ...... xxx, 61, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 175, 177, 
205, 206, 209, 235, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 
242, 243, 244, 246, 247, 248, 255, 257, 258, 
259, 260, 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 279, 280, 
282, 283, 295, 297, 299, 300, 301, 304, 308, 
309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 316 , 321, 322, 
324, 327, 330, 332, 340, 341, 342, 343, 365, 
369, 376, 386, 404, 417, 421, 424, 428, 429, 
462, 478, 584, 611, 618, 624, 625, 626, 627, 
633, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 645, 646, 
647, 648, 667  
Freight Marketing  ................................ ........  242 
Frequency  .... 214, 324, 325, 357 , 402, 471, 522, 
681 
Fresh  ................................ ............  611, 620, 640  
Fuel .. 40, 81, 119, 425, 426, 430, 431, 458, 570, 
579, 581, 662  
Fuels  ................................ .............................  662 
functions  .... 4, 10, 16, 19, 20, 23, 38, 70, 90, 97, 
102, 133, 156, 178, 198, 235, 237, 238, 239, 
240, 247, 295, 299, 309, 328, 360, 363, 370, 
395, 403, 416, 419, 429, 433, 470, 498, 502, 
550, 573, 590, 593, 605, 606, 614, 618, 619, 
620, 621, 658, 663, 665, 666, 667, 668, 669, 
670, 671, 673, 688  
Fund  ... 26, 36, 37, 38, 49, 69, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 
84, 86, 90, 94, 96, 98, 116, 130, 131, 139, 
140, 141, 193 , 200, 228, 412, 415, 435, 445, 
467, 483, 486, 495, 496, 509, 512, 537, 552, 
553, 598, 602, 682  Funds  ...... 54, 64, 81, 84, 89, 150, 174, 177, 181, 
200, 219, 379, 388, 401, 405, 412, 496, 509, 
526, 651  
Furniture  25, 26, 27, 28, 142, 162, 297, 323, 332  
FUTURE  ................................ ......................  321 
FWP  ................................ ..... 151, 170, 175, 396  
G 
Gap ................................ ..47, 183, 184, 381, 599  
Gate  .... 45, 46, 66, 143, 184, 185, 212, 214, 288, 
438, 439, 442, 444, 470, 471, 472, 486, 487, 
492, 493, 496, 531, 544, 546, 685  
Gates  ................................ ..............  82, 400, 562  
Gauge  ..... 77, 173, 177, 206, 239, 298, 301, 311, 
320, 353, 365 , 406, 413, 624, 625, 626, 665, 
668 
Gazetted  ... 16, 18, 25, 26, 27, 41, 47, 56, 62, 93, 
94, 100, 108, 109, 111, 124, 128, 129, 130, 
131, 147, 167, 228, 331, 395, 475, 572, 577, 
673 
GCC  ................................ ..... 221, 224, 225, 394  
GCM  ................................ ............  663, 664, 678  
GeM  ................................ ..... 503, 504, 505, 509  
General  .... xxix, xxx, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12, 13, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 32, 33, 
37, 54, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 75, 77, 79, 81, 82, 
83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 93, 100, 101, 103, 
105, 119, 128, 144, 147, 149, 152, 157, 170, 
173, 186, 188, 203, 208, 209,221, 22 4, 229, 
236, 237, 256, 257, 289, 300, 321, 327, 342, 
346, 347, 348, 365, 369, 370, 371, 372, 386, 
394, 395, 398, 410, 412, 413, 419, 424, 427, 
434, 435, 439, 442, 444, 445, 446, 464, 466, 
474, 475, 478, 480, 481, 482, 483, 485, 487, 
488, 494, 503, 511, 512 , 517, 521, 533, 534, 
535, 536, 537, 538, 545, 546, 550, 551, 563, 
567, 568, 569, 581, 584, 593, 595, 611, 613, 
618, 619, 621, 624, 659, 672, 682, 695  
General Manager  16, 17, 24, 25, 30, 83, 89, 103, 
105, 157, 170, 173, 188, 236, 237, 256, 365, 
370, 372, 3 86, 395, 424, 427, 434, 435, 464, 
494, 538, 563, 568, 619, 621, 624, 659, See 
GM 
Generation  ...............  18, 179, 244, 373, 507, 617  
GENIUS  ................................ .......................  594 
Geotechnical  ................................ ................  669 
GFN  ................................ .............................  671 
GFR  ................................ ..............  130, 503, 504  
Girder  ................................ ...................  182, 668  
Girders  ................................ .........  192, 200, 668  
 
 
737 
For internal use of IA&AD  GIS ............................  50, 98, 117, 472, 473, 496  
Global  ................................ ..................  342, 6 72 
GM ... 16, 17, 21, 25, 26, 30, 103, 131, 134, 151, 
157, 170, 173, 175, 180, 188, 190, 221, 223, 
292, 327, 336, 346, 365, 374, 395, 396, 400, 
407, 459, 462, 464, 486, 491, 554, 556, 558, 
563, 599  
Goods  ... 60, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 81, 156, 187, 
205, 207, 213,  226, 235, 238, 239, 240, 241, 
242, 244, 246, 247, 248, 255, 257, 258, 259, 
260, 261, 264, 265, 267, 268, 271, 277, 280, 
281, 287, 288, 293, 295, 297, 298, 299, 302, 
303, 305, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 
315, 322, 323, 324, 328, 329, 332, 335, 340, 
344, 346, 348, 354, 364, 366, 375, 377, 380, 
462, 501, 502, 506, 587  
Goods sheds  .... 70, 71, 73, 74, 81, 238, 240, 248  
Governing  .............  351, 583, 590, 663, 664, 678  
Governing Council  ...............................  583, 590  
Government  ... 17, 18, 25, 27, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 
43, 50, 54, 57, 59, 66, 75, 77, 78, 85, 87, 88, 
93, 109, 110, 111, 112, 115, 116, 126, 127, 
134, 137, 138, 139, 142, 160, 165, 170, 189, 
193, 194, 195, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 210, 
213, 231, 232, 250, 261, 262, 266, 276, 281, 
300, 310, 331, 370, 373, 378, 425, 432, 434, 
436, 451, 45 3, 467, 468, 470, 498, 503, 521, 
534, 542, 566, 568, 574, 576, 591, 593, 608, 
614, 616, 617, 620, 622, 623, 624, 625, 626, 
627, 630  
Govt  63, 112, 151, 160, 168, 192, 194, 203, 228, 
265, 266, 276, 277, 373, 488, 495, 585, 593, 
621, 622, 625  
GR .........  301, 302, 333 , 334, 347, 365, 397, 556  
Grade 17, 18, 120, 125, 183, 237, 282, 311, 429, 
577 
Grading  ................................ ........................  381 
Graduate  ................................ .........................  46 
Grant  25, 27, 28, 48, 75, 76, 77, 79, 89, 90, 114, 
125, 131, 133, 138, 140, 202, 225, 241, 413, 
433, 435, 471, 537, 538, 574, 597, 605, 606, 
607, 608, 60 9 
Grants  ... 32, 76, 83, 91, 138, 140, 179, 551, 591, 
595, 597  
Grass  ................................ .....209, 212, 213, 490  
Gratuity  ................................ ............  51, 98, 136  
Grievance  ................  96, 134, 244, 284, 581, 660  
Grievances  ... 93, 94, 97, 99, 125, 236, 244, 284, 
306, 325, 333, 398, 567  
Grooved  ................................ .......................  671 Ground 48, 53, 68, 102, 137, 1 39, 287, 407, 444, 
454, 489, 525, 531, 539, 540, 541, 545  
Ground rent  ................................ ..................  684 
Group  ... 50, 52, 79, 95, 100, 101, 102, 104, 105, 
117, 124, 125, 177, 211, 212, 366, 401, 472, 
473, 496, 573, 584, 614, 618, 619, 682, 689  
GRP  ................................ ...... 566, 567, 573, 574  
GRSP  ................................ ...........................  671 
GST  72, 210, 2 16, 225, 251, 252, 253, 508, 511, 
594, 622, 672  
Guarantee  ...... 222, 223, 279, 524, 525, 526, 529  
Guarantees  ................................ ...................  183 
Guards  .... 45, 113, 164, 211, 298, 300, 306, 313, 
316, 324, 357, 570, 579, 673, 681  
Guidance  57, 132, 216, 233, 255, 308, 315, 396, 
583, 603, 608, 615, 6 58, 664, 666  
Guidelines  xxx, 39, 40, 107, 150, 155, 156, 157, 
159, 165, 178, 187, 204, 206, 207, 216, 232, 
233, 236, 245, 246, 255, 258, 263, 292, 295, 
297, 299, 303, 304, 327, 330, 357, 362, 371, 
372, 373, 374, 375, 378, 380, 381, 393, 394, 
401, 446, 449,  453, 454, 484, 499, 501, 502, 
512, 523, 552, 559, 569, 570, 575, 585, 588, 
589, 603, 614, 615, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 
638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 
647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 655, 
659, 666, 668, 669, 670, 672  
Guwahati  ................................ ..........................  7 
H 
Hajipur ................................ .....................  7, 466  
Halls  ................................ .............................  379 
Halt ................................ ..............  245, 273, 274  
Halts  ................................ .............................  293 
Hand  . 16, 65, 101, 122, 281, 288, 289, 291, 342, 
354, 446, 452, 469, 494, 500, 501, 522, 528, 
538, 541, 542, 573, 597  
Handing  ...... 25, 26, 27, 211, 214, 215, 247, 463, 
599, 681  
Handling ........................ 288, 291, 454, 551, 552  
Hardware  ................................ ..............  273, 362  
Haridaspur  ............................  612, 626, 627, 647  
Haulage  . 257, 259, 275, 288, 293, 315, 340, 356  
Hauling ................................ . 375, 431, 432, 464  
Hazardous  ................................ ....................  454 
HBA  ................................ ..50, 96, 129, 130, 690  
Head  ....... 16, 17, 33, 64, 69, 70, 77, 89, 90, 118, 
137, 139, 158, 180, 181, 190, 195, 196, 210, 
232, 236, 237, 257, 280, 309, 330, 370, 379, 
393, 406, 445, 448, 482, 499, 533, 535, 537, 
INDEX  
 
738 
For internal use of IA&AD  540, 541, 549, 557, 567, 579, 584, 590, 614, 
615, 673  
Head 3002 -03 ................................ ...............  574 
Head -2016  ................................ ....................  413 
Headquarter  ...... 16, 17, 122, 381, 394, 478, 557, 
583 
Headquartered  ................................ ..............  550 
Headquarters  1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 33, 43, 44, 48, 79, 
102, 115, 119, 120, 124, 130, 131, 132, 133, 
139, 141, 149, 174, 285, 286, 298, 303, 304, 
309, 316, 372, 388, 392, 393, 413, 417, 424, 
427, 506, 545, 549, 555, 558, 561, 588, 589, 
602, 689, 693, 694, 695, 708  
Health  ... 100, 1 08, 147, 149, 150, 151, 154, 156, 
159, 165, 166, 167, 170, 171, 186, 198, 404, 
430, 431, 432, 490, 492, 496, 580, 622  
Heritage  ................................ ........................  452 
HERO  ................................ ..........................  170 
Hierarchy  2, 17, 33, 93, 125, 127, 149, 235, 370, 
485, 498, 567, 593, 605, 688, 691, 708  
High  . 18, 40, 128, 237, 240,  243, 282, 313, 323, 
342, 371, 395, 401, 426, 450, 484, 503, 521, 
552, 553, 587, 612, 623, 624, 629, 644, 651, 
661, 662  
High speed  ................................ ...........  426, 662  
Highway  ................................ 612, 622, 627, 642  
Hire ...............................  141, 142, 216, 343, 347  
Hiring  ............................  451, 452, 463, 570, 579  
History  . 181, 187, 199, 320, 3 63, 405, 448, 456, 
485, 508, 510  
History Sheet ................................  448, 508, 510  
HMIS  ................................ ....153, 156, 157, 170  
HOER  ...............  47, 96, 124, 317, 358, 366, 381  
Holiday  .................  41, 44, 93, 94, 138, 139, 357  
Holistic  ................................ ...........  32, 484, 659  
Home ................................ .....268, 316, 570, 579  
Home -guards  ................................ ................  579 
Honorarium  ................................ ..........  141, 142  
Honorary  .......................  152, 160, 170, 492, 685  
Hospital  123, 149, 150, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 
158, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
168, 170, 184, 660, 673  
Hospitality  .................  25, 26, 139, 140, 495, 617  
Hostel  ................................ ....111, 112, 113, 407  
Hours ...... 45, 67, 68, 94, 96, 124, 366, 439, 443, 
444, 471 , 473  
House  ..... 23, 43, 48, 49, 96, 109, 110, 129, 130, 
214, 254, 293, 429, 464, 471, 478, 490, 495, 
573, 577, 585  
House Rent  ................................ ...........  109, 110  HQ ...... 22, 23, 81, 302, 303, 304, 305, 307, 318, 
319, 320, 328, 331, 334, 346, 348, 357, 358, 
396, 397, 462, 503, 507, 508, 509, 550, 554, 
555, 567, 690  
HR ................................ ...93, 620, 645, 646, 647  
HRA  ................................ .........  43, 51, 110, 111  
HSD  .............................. 198, 431, 458, 459, 580  
Hub ................................ ......................  238, 339  
Hubballi  ................................ ...........................  7 
Human  ............................... 98, 99, 144, 380, 560  
Hydraulics  ................................ ....................  668 
Hygiene  ................................ ................  149, 154  
Hypothecation  ................................ ..............  222 
I 
IA&AD  ................................ ............  3, 690, 708  
ICAI  .............................. 585, 591, 598, 608, 615  
ICF ........  326, 366, 427, 466, 472, 496, 515, 519  
ICMS  .... 302, 314, 318, 319, 321, 325, 333, 358, 
360, 361, 362, 363, 366, 434, 455, 456  
Identification  ...... xxx, 39, 97, 99, 137, 139, 185, 
196, 210, 212, 213, 254, 300, 312, 350, 379, 
450, 490, 491, 578, 599, 658  
Identity Cards  ................................ ...............  673 
IDHHL  ................................ .........  612, 622, 642  
IEC ................................ ...............................  402 
IIT ................................ ........................  660, 664  
IITs ................................ .......................  664, 672  
iMMIS  .... 41, 404, 405, 501, 503, 506, 507, 508, 
509, 511, 523, 537, 538, 539, 540, 544, 571, 
580, 660  
iMMS  ................................ ...........  314, 504, 505  
Impact  .................  24, 89, 90, 256, 306, 453, 656  
Implementation  16, 21, 24, 25, 26, 94, 1 08, 129, 
156, 160, 165, 205, 225, 236, 246, 255, 256, 
270, 295, 296, 297, 302, 333, 361, 394, 395, 
396, 400, 426, 429, 475, 552, 553, 554, 555, 
556, 558, 559, 561, 584, 627, 670, 675, 676, 
677, 678, 679, 680, 687  
Implementing  ....... xxx, 2, 39, 40, 236, 300, 394,  
485, 499, 584, 593, 606  
Import  ........................... 399, 499, 521, 536, 616  
Imported  ....... 428, 490, 512, 520, 521, 529, 535, 
536, 537, 627, 658, 665  
Imprest 25, 26, 28, 138, 140, 141, 142, 159, 199, 
203, 211, 213, 215, 216, 287, 292, 327, 330, 
331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 411, 46 2, 463, 
486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 493, 494, 508, 
509, 510, 527, 541, 545, 546, 556, 570, 579, 
 
 
739 
For internal use of IA&AD  580, 581, 660, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 
681, 682, 683, 684  
Inactive  .........................  500, 501, 509, 545, 546  
Incentive  24, 46, 47, 66, 67, 237, 244, 378, 427, 
429, 438, 4 39, 443, 444, 447, 472, 473, 474, 
478, 496  
Incidence  ................................ .54, 191, 436, 468  
Incidental  ................................ .....................  546 
Income  . 41, 51, 98, 99, 132, 142, 145, 578, 586, 
588, 591, 594, 595, 597, 598, 606, 607, 672  
Increment  ..... 42, 46, 95, 98, 108, 109, 488, 494, 
560 
Indemnity  ................................ .....................  288 
Indent  ... 257, 25 8, 305, 355, 429, 434, 529, 530, 
537 
Indents  .. 102, 119, 155, 177, 215, 216, 258, 271, 
292, 297, 309, 315, 324, 332, 364, 401, 458, 
462, 524, 529, 580  
Independence  ...............................  138, 140, 495  
independent  .... 14, 204, 207, 222, 319, 352, 370, 
386, 394, 550, 585, 586, 709  
Index  ...... 43, 138, 140, 181, 426, 488, 495, 675, 
676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 683, 685  
India  .. xxix, xxx, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 
18, 32, 33, 35, 36, 39, 40, 43, 57, 64, 75, 93, 
99, 100, 102, 110, 114, 116, 126, 129, 130, 
151, 170, 202, 204, 222, 225, 233 , 273, 282, 
286, 300, 372, 373, 418, 434, 436, 455, 498, 
502, 512, 520, 526, 584, 585, 589, 605, 608, 
611, 612, 615, 616, 617, 618, 620, 621, 622, 
623, 624, 627, 629, 630, 631, 632, 633, 637, 
656, 687, 693, 704, 705  
Indian  .. xxix, xxx, 17, 18, 23, 27, 30, 32 , 38, 54, 
70, 76, 77, 79, 84, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 
107, 122, 149, 152, 156, 157, 159, 170, 176, 
178, 182, 183, 187, 188, 195, 198, 200, 201, 
203, 204, 205, 218, 230, 238, 246, 248, 250, 
254, 255, 257, 267, 268, 272, 273,274, 280, 
281, 300, 303, 308, 310,  316, 318, 324, 325, 
361, 366, 369, 370, 372, 377, 379, 380, 381, 
386, 394, 399, 404, 406, 409, 421, 426, 433, 
434, 435, 439, 442, 446, 447, 449, 453, 455, 
456, 457, 464, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 
474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 
483, 498, 501, 502, 506, 511, 520, 528, 548, 
550, 551, 554, 555, 557, 558, 559, 561, 562, 
563, 566, 570, 583, 584, 605, 611, 612, 613, 
616, 617, 618, 619, 621, 622, 623, 626, 628, 
635, 638, 643, 658, 659, 660, 663, 664, 665, 
666, 668, 669, 670, 671, 687  Indian Post  ................................ ...................  273 
Indian Railways  ... xxix, xxx, 17, 23, 32, 38, 54, 
70, 76, 77, 79, 99, 100, 101, 102, 122, 149, 
156, 178, 183, 187, 205, 238, 246, 248, 255, 
257, 274, 280, 281, 300, 303, 310, 316, 318, 
324, 361, 369, 372, 377, 380, 381, 386, 399, 
404, 406, 409, 421, 426, 433, 434, 442, 
455,456, 457, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 
475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 483, 
498, 502, 506, 548, 550, 551, 554, 557, 559, 
563, 566, 583, 584, 605, 616, 617, 619, 621, 
623, 626, 658, 663, 665, 687  
Indices  ........................... 298, 310, 312, 313, 523  
Indigenization  ..............................  663, 666, 667  
Indigenous  ................................ .........  499, 535  
Indirect  . 47, 66, 67, 70, 102, 438, 443, 444, 448, 
472, 473, 477, 479, 480, 534  
Indoor  ................................ ... 161, 167, 673, 684  
Industrial  .... 93, 94, 96, 128, 147, 301, 333, 619, 
620 
Industries  ................................ ...... 405, 612, 659  
Industry  .........  323, 342, 403, 62 1, 663, 667, 668  
Informatics  ................................ ....... 3, 284, 687  
Information  .... xxx, 1, 2, 23, 30, 70, 71, 97, 108, 
153, 156, 170, 182, 236, 239, 244, 246, 250, 
254, 269, 284, 298, 309, 314, 315, 317, 318, 
320, 323, 341, 357, 358, 360, 365, 366, 380, 
403, 404, 406, 407, 409, 417, 43 4, 456, 464, 
496, 501, 502, 506, 554, 561, 563, 564,571, 
580, 583, 584, 585, 629, 660, 671, 687, 690  
Information System  ..............................  404, 571  
Information Technology  ..... 170, 246, 250, 357, 
358, 380, 403, 404, 406, 407, 496, 502, 585  
Infrastructure  .... 6, 9, 17, 38, 204, 205, 2 06, 207, 
233, 243, 283, 318, 319, 320, 331, 341, 360, 
375, 376, 397, 425, 455, 460, 515, 517, 593, 
605, 606, 611, 612, 616, 619, 620, 621, 622, 
623, 624, 629, 641  
Infringement  ................................ . 344, 397, 552  
Ink ...........  59, 118, 157, 188, 231, 435, 474, 602  
Innovative  ................................ ......................  38 
Inoperativ e ................................ .............  49, 408  
Inputs  ................................ ...........  162, 299, 521  
Inquires  ................................ ........................  551 
Inquiry  ...............  19, 22, 127, 238, 552, 553, 555  
Inspection  . 10, 11, 14, 20, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 40, 
58, 60, 61, 81, 90, 132, 137, 139, 140, 141, 
142, 143, 164, 165, 167, 168, 177, 182, 184, 
185, 186, 194, 196, 199, 208, 2 09, 211, 212, 
213, 215, 216, 224, 255, 287, 290, 291, 292, 
INDEX  
 
740 
For internal use of IA&AD  297, 303, 321, 322, 324, 325, 327, 335, 336, 
340, 343, 347, 376, 389, 390, 391, 392, 395, 
396, 398, 399, 400, 418, 419, 429, 433, 434, 
454, 458, 459, 461, 462, 468, 470, 486, 487, 
489, 490, 491, 49 2, 493, 495, 498, 500, 507, 
509, 510, 511, 519, 524, 525, 527, 529, 544, 
545, 553, 554, 557, 558, 560, 561, 562, 568, 
572, 581, 617, 660, 661, 666, 668, 671, 673, 
675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 684, 
685 
Inspections  . 5, 6, 13, 14, 20, 58, 60, 62, 70 , 115, 
165, 182, 183, 184, 194, 225, 263, 291, 299, 
301, 303, 307, 333, 335, 344, 378, 390, 469, 
535, 550, 554, 556, 557, 560, 562, 675  
Inspector  .. 28, 47, 133, 142, 238, 263, 267, 275, 
287, 306, 357, 358, 366, 370, 381, 390, 391, 
398, 492, 496, 541, 567, 57 3, 577  
Inspector General  ................................ .........  567 
Inspectors  ....... 45, 113, 133, 209, 263, 343, 380, 
490, 539, 557  
Institute  .........  196, 367, 380, 563, 585, 608, 629  
Institutes  ..........  93, 138, 140, 196, 302, 335, 380  
Institutions  ............  106, 130, 664, 675, 677, 680  
Instructions  xxx, 24, 58, 66, 100, 119 , 124, 127, 
134, 156, 185, 187, 192, 224, 233, 255, 256, 
258, 267, 277, 300, 302, 304, 307, 311, 329, 
334, 348, 352, 358, 374, 389, 390, 391, 394, 
396, 399, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 
442, 444, 448, 449, 451, 454, 468, 469, 471, 
502, 511, 527, 530,  531, 532, 539, 553, 569, 
573, 578, 579, 585, 586, 588, 589, 594, 601, 
602, 608, 659, 660, 661, 666, 667  
Instrument  .............  202, 409, 519, 675, 677, 679  
Instrumental  ................................ .........  658, 670  
Insurance  ...........  50, 52, 117, 118, 130, 527, 598  
Integrated  ..... xxx, 23, 30, 40, 45, 176, 183, 314, 
316, 318, 338, 339, 342, 358, 366, 406, 416, 
417, 427, 433, 434, 455, 456, 457, 501, 506, 
511, 571, 578, 580, 612, 628, 649, 660  
Integrated Payroll and Accounting System  .... 40 
Intensive  ................................ .................  45, 308  
Interactive  ................................ ............  246, 392  
Interchange ... 298, 302, 304, 309, 310, 312, 31 5, 
319, 334, 343, 345, 346  
interchanged  ........................ 13, 35, 74, 268, 344  
Interest  ..... 37, 49, 50, 64, 83, 98, 124, 129, 130, 
132, 134, 192, 193, 198, 202, 207, 223, 229, 
230, 436, 448, 451, 452, 468, 470, 477, 541, 
615, 638, 656, 676, 677  
Interface  ................  319, 354, 402, 434, 457 , 498  Interlinked  ................................ ..............  42, 585  
Interlocking  .. 352, 353, 386, 389, 390, 397, 400, 
401, 555, 564  
Inter -locking  ................................ .................  192 
Intermediate  .........................  366, 431, 432, 464  
Internal  ..... 36, 64, 74, 77, 97, 98, 179, 180, 187, 
204, 207, 225, 246, 266, 267, 279, 287, 288, 
292, 449, 585, 587, 589, 590, 595, 596, 607, 
608, 633, 662, 672, 688, 692  
International  . 239, 402, 605, 606, 616, 617, 628, 
659 
Internet  .......................... 316, 319, 395, 585, 617  
Intervals  107, 163, 350, 390, 438, 472, 533, 598  
Intranet  ................................ .........................  585 
Inventory  .. 38, 61, 138, 140, 156, 159, 183, 288, 
291, 314, 3 15, 316, 342, 343, 426, 429, 433, 
455, 460, 462, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 
492, 493, 495, 498, 499, 509, 510, 513, 514, 
518, 520, 545, 598  
Investigation  ..............  22, 30, 156, 664, 668, 670  
Investment  ...... 78, 157, 188, 202, 203, 205, 206, 
207, 208, 243, 244, 283, 40 6, 407, 595, 596, 
615, 624  
Investments  ................................ .. 341, 591, 596  
Invoices  .......................  70, 71, 72, 258, 506, 537  
Inward  ... 244, 265, 266, 271, 307, 345, 346, 581  
IOH ...............  318, 366, 431, 432, 455, 459, 464  
IPAS  . xxx, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 
52, 89, 99, 144, 176, 183, 380, 43 4, 504, 
505, 511, 526, 570, 660, 694  
IPPRS  ................................ ...........  272, 273, 274  
IR 28, 29, 32, 33, 76, 90, 147, 149, 170, 205, 
262, 263, 264, 267, 269, 275, 280, 283, 285, 
295, 316, 338, 341, 342, 372, 381, 386, 404, 
552, 553, 563, 566, 567, 583, 621, 660, 667  
IRCA  ...... 11, 238, 239,  240, 254, 257, 274, 426, 
464 
IRCON  . 372, 611, 612, 616, 621, 622, 627, 628, 
634, 641, 648, 649  
IRCOT  ................................ .........  302, 333, 366  
IRCTC  .. 236, 242, 268, 277, 285, 286, 326, 366, 
572, 611, 617, 618, 635  
IREM  ....................  102, 107, 113, 119, 132, 133  
IREPS  .... xxx, 41, 152, 156, 170, 176, 18 7, 380, 
404, 405, 434, 501, 502, 506, 507, 508, 511, 
516, 520, 523, 526, 540, 660, 672  
IRFC  ................................ ...... 78, 611, 619, 638  
IRMM  .. 158, 159, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
170 
IRPMU  ................................ .........................  386 
 
 
741 
For internal use of IA&AD  IRPSM  . 176, 178, 179, 180, 374, 380, 406, 434, 
660 
IRPWM  ................................ .193, 194, 198, 200  
Irregulariti es ..... 19, 20, 22, 23, 28, 38, 262, 281, 
437, 448, 528, 672  
Irregularity  ................................ ...................  232 
IRSDCL  ................................ ....... 612, 622, 643  
IRSP  ................................ ............................  422 
ISO ................................ ...............  516, 625, 672  
Issuance  ................................ ................  494, 545  
Issue  . 28, 58, 69, 70, 89, 94, 127, 139, 140, 141, 
142, 143, 154, 159, 162, 163, 175, 185, 187, 
204, 209, 210, 211, 21 2, 213, 214, 215, 216, 
223, 224, 236, 243, 245, 247, 259, 270, 272, 
274, 289, 290, 292, 302, 316, 325, 329, 334, 
343, 350, 357, 396, 399, 437, 440, 445, 451, 
453, 462, 469, 475, 476, 480, 481, 486, 487, 
488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495, 499, 500, 
503, 506 , 507, 508, 509, 521, 528, 529, 530, 
531, 532, 533, 535, 536, 537, 538, 544, 546, 
556, 560, 567, 568, 580, 605, 614, 615, 662, 
663, 667, 670, 681, 682, 684  
Issue notes  .... 212, 213, 343, 440, 462, 476, 487, 
490, 491, 528, 531, 681, 682  
Issues .... 297, 313, 323, 32 4, 325, 327, 330, 331, 
333, 334, 335, 337, 342, 344, 361, 426, 440, 
530, 531, 543, 551, 553, 554  
IT xxx, 21, 23, 51, 97, 152, 156, 170, 176, 178, 
183, 187, 244, 246, 250, 255, 311, 314, 318, 
338, 357, 358, 360, 361, 380, 400, 404, 405, 
406, 407, 408, 433, 434, 455, 483, 496, 502, 
553, 556, 561, 570, 583, 584, 585, 589, 590, 
594, 619, 656, 660  
itemized  ................................ ......................  422 
I-Ticketing  ................................ ...................  236 
IZZAT  ................................ ..........................  249 
J 
Jabalpur  ................................ ............................  7 
Jaipur ................................ ........................  7, 659  
Jan Sadharan  ................................ ........  241, 273  
JE 392, 399, 474, 496  
Job .............................  47, 66, 124, 443, 473, 479  
Jobs ...... 24, 66, 68, 69, 139, 439, 445, 453, 469, 
470, 478, 481, 607  
Joining  ................................ ............................  53 
Joint .. 18, 96, 147, 170, 183, 184, 185, 186, 205, 
347, 395, 591, 605, 619, 621, 622, 625, 626, 
633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641  Journal  ...... 44, 65, 84, 85, 86, 87, 191, 410, 441, 
442, 477, 482, 507, 5 28, 536, 608, 609  
Journals  .. 25, 26, 27, 65, 85, 115, 168, 209, 211, 
213, 214, 602, 682  
JTBS  ............................. 245, 269, 272, 273, 286  
Judgements ................................ ...................  462 
Junction  ................................ ................  392, 625  
Junior  ........................  18, 47, 391, 474, 496, 549  
Jurisdiction  ... 115, 183, 282, 283, 306, 344, 390, 
394, 398, 568, 571, 589, 6 11, 612, 614  
Justification  .. 27, 53, 54, 63, 106, 115, 157, 158, 
161, 179, 181, 188, 212, 218, 219, 229, 236, 
241, 243, 273, 274, 285, 289, 438, 468, 474, 
490, 523, 539, 560, 575, 579, 682  
K 
Kennels  ................................ ........................  580 
Kilometers  ............................  112, 298, 299, 313  
Kilometrage  ...........................  41, 108, 113,  114 
KMS  ................................ .............  687, 692, 709  
Knowledge  ... 167, 311, 316, 548, 607, 662, 687, 
692, 709  
Kolkata  .............................. 7, 466, 626, 659, 665  
Konkan  ...... 7, 156, 170, 187, 322, 324, 366, 502  
KRCL  ... 156, 170, 187, 297, 324, 366, 502, 625, 
626 
Krishnapatnam  .............................  612, 626, 647  
L 
Lab ................................ ....... 665, 666, 670, 678  
Laboratories  . 143, 150, 151, 152, 161, 162, 168, 
452, 483, 665  
Laboratory  .... 156, 158, 452, 483, 492, 665, 668, 
669 
Labour  .... 24, 35, 37, 66, 68, 69, 70, 82, 94, 123, 
124, 133, 147, 175, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 
216, 219, 221, 227, 278, 287, 403, 439, 441, 
442, 444,  445, 446, 447, 448, 452, 462, 468, 
469, 470, 471, 472, 474, 475, 477, 480, 481, 
482, 489, 490, 491, 523  
Labour pay sheets  ............. 66, 69, 439, 442, 445  
Lack  ................................ ..... 206, 312, 334, 349  
Laid 45, 57, 64, 65, 75, 100, 105, 107, 109, 120, 
129, 133, 190, 193, 231, 262, 270, 30 2, 307, 
311, 327, 333, 344, 348, 353, 373, 374, 380, 
393, 398, 401, 409, 436, 437, 438, 440, 446, 
448, 449, 453, 469, 470, 471, 483, 511, 520, 
526, 575, 578, 579, 580, 596, 672  
Land 2, 9, 19, 22, 32, 35, 36, 174, 175, 176, 177, 
184, 186, 191, 197, 198, 205 , 208, 210, 212, 
INDEX  
 
742 
For internal use of IA&AD  213, 214, 215, 242, 245, 277, 278, 293, 453, 
489, 593, 594, 596, 598, 599, 600, 601, 622, 
623, 625, 627, 680, 705  
languages  ................................ .....................  709 
LAP  ...............  43, 46, 52, 53, 120, 121, 486, 496  
LARSGESS  ................................ .................  106 
Last purchase rate  ................................ ........  523 
Late 62, 142, 202, 305, 306, 329, 47 1, 525, 527, 
675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 683, 684, 
685 
Law .. 57, 63, 126, 203, 226, 282, 404, 411, 462, 
566, 588, 589, 607, 614  
Law Charges  ................................ ........  203, 411  
laws .. 14, 93, 134, 382, 383, 384, 583, 584, 589, 
590, 595, 608  
LCD  ................................ .............................  439 
LD ................................ ................................  224 
LDHB  ................................ ..........................  601 
Lease  .............................  210, 488, 594, 616, 622  
Leased  .............................  71, 277, 279, 625, 681  
Leasing  ..... 36, 71, 156, 175, 177, 187, 197, 237, 
239, 241, 243, 245, 270, 272, 277, 278, 502, 
594, 600, 601, 617, 621  
Leave .. 24, 25, 26, 27, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 
52, 53, 81, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, 108, 109, 
110, 111, 115, 117, 120, 121, 122, 123, 136, 
138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 144, 169, 177, 186, 
197, 209, 211, 212, 214, 215, 343, 346, 347, 
470, 471, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 
492, 493, 494, 495, 496, 545, 577, 578, 581, 
602, 603, 675, 676, 677, 678, 67 9, 680, 681, 
682, 683, 684, 685, 687, 690, 691, 692  
LED ................................ ..............................  379 
Ledger  .. 49, 62, 65, 68, 70, 85, 86, 88, 146, 183, 
185, 187, 191, 228, 346, 410, 441, 442, 444, 
448, 474, 476, 477, 490, 491, 493, 494, 499, 
500, 507, 528, 530, 531, 532, 533, 536, 539, 
546, 682, 68 4 
Ledgers  .. 65, 69, 85, 87, 88, 141, 169, 212, 213, 
216, 227, 375, 441, 446, 458, 463, 475, 480, 
491, 492, 528, 532, 533, 534, 535, 608, 672, 
681, 683, 684  
legacy  ................................ ...........................  709 
Legal  .... 51, 58, 93, 96, 103, 128, 189, 204, 226, 
230, 237, 256, 281, 284, 303, 335, 526, 660,  
673 
Legislative  ................................ ..............  10, 366  
Letter of Acceptance  ............................  223, 503  
Level Crossing  ..............  184, 185, 186, 400, 563  
Level crossings  ..... 175, 210, 324, 352, 353, 386  Levy  . 72, 73, 224, 225, 355, 442, 446, 474, 478, 
578 
LHAP  ..................  46, 52, 53, 120, 121, 486, 496  
Liabilities  .............................  118, 537, 586, 59 5 
Liability  123, 292, 356, 390, 462, 489, 595, 597, 
605 
Liaison  ..... 16, 20, 165, 237, 302, 305, 333, 393, 
395, 397, 426, 428, 429, 430, 552, 555, 556, 
568, 569, 574, 576  
Liberalized  ................................ ...................  106 
Library  . 138, 140, 143, 168, 292, 408, 487, 489, 
490, 491, 492, 495, 670  
Licence  ................................ .................  293, 636  
Licensed  ................................ .......................  293 
Licensing  ...............  175, 197, 242, 245, 277, 278  
Lift ................................ ...............................  379 
LIMBS  ................................ .........................  660 
Limited  ... 77, 156, 170, 173, 176, 187, 220, 286, 
365, 366, 372, 502, 520, 522, 563, 605, 611, 
612, 616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 
624, 625, 626, 627, 628, 629, 633 , 634, 635, 
636, 637, 638, 639, 641, 643, 644, 645, 646, 
647, 648, 650, 663, 672  
Line ...... 54, 79, 80, 83, 134, 165, 173, 174, 179, 
180, 182, 184, 186, 198, 199, 201, 205, 206, 
209, 218, 241, 301, 304, 308, 309, 312, 314, 
315, 318, 320, 328, 329, 337, 338, 341,  342, 
344, 347, 350, 369, 372, 375, 386, 389, 392, 
393, 394, 396, 402, 413, 424, 425,427, 428, 
449, 453, 455, 459, 467, 475, 605, 614, 624, 
625, 626, 627  
Linen  .............  152, 162, 168, 428, 434, 491, 684  
Linens  ................................ ..........................  684 
Lines  ................................ ............................  659 
Linking  ................................ . 115, 185, 374, 688  
Liquidate  ................................ ......................  545 
Liquidated  .... 511, 524, 525, 527, 546, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 
645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 
654 
List ... 24, 30, 137, 144, 145, 146, 167, 170, 181, 
186, 187, 208, 241, 265, 269, 300, 319, 340, 
344, 345, 353, 357, 365 , 373, 399, 464, 485, 
493, 494, 496, 508, 509, 520, 545, 563, 591, 
596, 633, 656, 660, 666, 675, 681, 685  
Listing  ................................ ..........................  661 
Liveries  ................................ ................  292, 487  
Llandslides  ................................ ...................  550 
LMS  ................................ .............................  314 
LOA  ................................ .............  223, 224, 507  
 
 
743 
For internal use of IA&AD  Loading  226, 238, 247, 253, 254, 257, 258, 259, 
260, 262, 263, 271, 279, 297, 298, 301, 303, 
304, 305, 308, 309, 310, 312, 313, 314, 315, 
316, 324, 326, 328, 329, 330, 332, 337, 340, 
354, 364, 375, 459, 461, 668  
Loan  ................................ ........ 84, 187, 204, 494  
Loans .........  37, 48, 50, 82, 98, 99, 132, 608, 656  
Local  .. 11, 13, 27, 39, 50, 51, 54, 58, 60, 61, 62, 
64, 6 5, 70, 91, 102, 131, 142, 152, 156, 158, 
159, 166, 168, 188, 189, 192, 197, 204, 225, 
258, 265, 269, 273, 291, 307, 308, 311, 337, 
348, 349, 350, 351, 371, 378, 392, 405, 408, 
422, 435, 458, 460, 463, 484, 485, 488, 492, 
534, 535, 544, 545, 571, 659, 683, 684, 688  
Localised  ................................ ..............  573, 580  
Loco  ... 45, 73, 80, 113, 247, 298, 301, 304, 305, 
306, 307, 308, 309, 311, 316, 322, 325, 327, 
332, 338, 348, 349, 350, 352, 355, 357, 358, 
359, 364, 365, 366, 371, 375, 376, 380, 381, 
427, 428, 431, 439, 449, 453, 460, 461, 553, 
555, 557, 559, 611  
Locomotive  .. 304, 311, 314, 315, 317, 353, 354, 
355, 356, 375, 376, 381, 427, 464, 466, 467, 
496, 499, 515, 542, 543, 662, 663, 668, 677  
Locomotives . 246, 308, 312, 313, 318, 329, 341, 
358, 369, 375, 376, 377, 421, 427, 428, 460, 
479, 486, 5 61, 658, 662, 663, 671, 673  
Locos ...... 80, 341, 375, 376, 425, 428, 429, 431, 
432, 458, 460, 461  
Log ..... 25, 26, 27, 138, 140, 199, 213, 215, 461, 
462, 489, 490, 491, 493, 495, 690  
Log books  ............................. 211, 491, 678, 679  
Logbook  ................................ .......................  680 
Loggers  ................................ ........................  409 
Logical  ................................ .........................  360 
Login  ................................ ............  360, 361, 502  
Longitudinal  ................................ .................  668 
Loss  .... 58, 62, 75, 126, 132, 151, 168, 192, 193, 
223, 224, 258, 259, 260, 263, 264, 274, 282, 
284, 291, 318, 329, 330, 340, 346, 353, 363, 
408, 438, 439, 452, 471, 472, 480, 483, 493, 
522, 524, 533, 540, 545, 581, 586, 595, 596, 
597 
Lost .. 66, 75, 193, 242, 279, 304, 319, 320, 439, 
443, 462, 472, 546  
Lost Property ................................ ........  240, 279  
Lot ................................ ................  487, 506, 508  
LPO  ................................ ..............  253, 276, 279  
LPR ................................ ..............................  523 
LR ................................ ........................  357, 358  Lubricants  ............................  426, 499, 669, 672  
Luggage  ... 70, 71, 238, 239, 240, 242, 243, 253, 
268, 270, 276, 291, 367  
Luggages  ................................ ......................  270 
Lump  ...................  46, 50, 58, 151, 175, 200, 225  
Lumpsum  ...................... 117, 135, 257, 279, 512  
LWR  ................................ .... 183, 184, 185, 186  
M 
M&P  .... 157, 158, 168, 170, 396, 397, 421, 424, 
426, 427, 429, 440, 450, 458, 460, 464  
M.S.O  ................................ .......................  11, 12  
M128  ................................ ............................  508 
M140  ................................ ............................  507 
M17  ................................ ......................  249, 250  
M9 ................................ ................  249, 250, 269  
Machine  177, 184, 186, 198, 199, 226, 272, 291, 
292, 400, 410, 441, 442, 450, 462, 476, 502, 
666, 679  
Machinery  .. 78, 93, 96, 157, 158, 170, 200, 222, 
244, 297, 323, 346, 421, 426, 427, 430, 431, 
433, 446, 452, 460, 464, 477, 485, 492, 660, 
675, 676, 679, 680  
Machines  ...... 185, 187, 19 4, 198, 199, 208, 272, 
288, 291, 427, 458, 459, 460, 461, 463, 473, 
485, 540, 666, 672, 678, 679  
MACPS  ........................... 96, 125, 126, 137, 139  
Macro  ................................ ...........................  670 
Magazine  ................................ ................  21, 682  
Magazines  ................................ ....................  143 
Mail  ...... 298, 313, 318, 319, 330, 348, 358, 363, 
366, 425  
Maintenance  ... 16, 21, 22, 35, 52, 56,  64, 66, 79, 
80, 84, 93, 94, 96, 99, 110, 114, 130, 137, 
138, 139, 140, 152, 154, 162, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 190, 191, 
192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 205, 
206, 208, 209, 216, 218, 220, 223, 229, 240, 
241, 287, 297, 298,  302, 308, 314, 315, 317, 
318, 324, 325, 326, 334, 335, 338, 340, 343, 
344, 349, 355, 364, 369, 370, 371, 373, 375, 
376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 389, 390, 391, 
392, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 403, 
405, 411, 412, 418, 421, 424, 425, 426, 427, 
428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 436, 437, 
439, 446, 449, 450, 451, 452, 454, 455, 456, 
458, 459, 460, 463, 468, 488, 495, 499, 500, 
534, 550, 551, 552, 553, 566, 568, 570, 578, 
579, 580, 584, 585, 589, 598, 608, 618, 619, 
622, 625, 626, 628, 629, 645, 646, 6 47, 658, 
INDEX  
 
744 
For internal use of IA&AD  659, 661, 662, 663, 664, 666, 667, 668, 670, 
672, 679, 681, 683, 691  
Major ...... 23, 36, 38, 53, 60, 76, 77, 84, 96, 126, 
127, 133, 173, 176, 182, 203, 210, 247, 248, 
285, 295, 296, 300, 305, 306, 308, 310, 312, 
369, 386, 393, 413, 414, 419, 452, 468, 4 86, 
491, 498, 556, 574, 578, 608, 614, 658  
Malkhana  ................................ .............  572, 581  
Management . xxx, 16, 18, 21, 24, 30, 36, 38, 45, 
70, 71, 76, 93, 96, 97, 99, 100, 107, 108, 
114, 118, 149, 153, 156, 166, 170, 174, 176, 
177, 178, 179, 182, 183, 186, 197, 203, 204, 
207, 208, 233,  240, 241, 244, 245, 246, 247, 
248, 253, 260, 270, 271, 298, 299, 301, 306, 
309, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 
322, 325, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 340, 342, 343, 347, 357, 358, 361, 363, 
364, 365, 366, 367, 373, 375, 376, 377, 380, 
381, 382, 383, 384, 386, 395, 396, 397, 401, 
404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 411, 412, 417, 421, 
425, 428, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 439, 454, 
455, 456, 458, 498, 499, 501, 506, 513, 514, 
518, 545, 550, 552, 553, 554, 555, 557, 558, 
559, 560, 561, 562, 563, 568, 5 69, 570, 571, 
574, 578, 580, 583, 584, 585, 589, 590, 594, 
595, 596, 598, 606, 608, 612, 616, 617, 622, 
623, 628, 629, 633, 643, 660, 662, 667, 670, 
680, 687, 690, 692, 705, 709  
Manager 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 26, 30, 33, 131, 139, 
170, 236, 237, 256, 295, 297 , 300, 301, 302, 
304, 327, 328, 330, 331, 337, 340, 348, 365, 
366, 367, 370, 386, 419, 424, 429, 453, 464, 
466, 477, 486, 492, 494, 496, 499, 512, 519, 
563, 619, 620, 621, 623, 624, 695  
Managers  .... 16, 17, 33, 100, 236, 237, 238, 302, 
317, 334, 424, 472, 478,  499, 550, 593, 618, 
619, 623, 624  
Managing Director  ....... 584, 590, 616, 617, 618, 
619, 624, 625, 626  
Manipulate  ................................ ...................  572 
Manpower  24, 95, 100, 149, 150, 155, 160, 177, 
203, 312, 315, 318, 375, 376, 380, 401, 405, 
411, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 484, 560, 569, 
659 
Manual ... xxx, 1, 2, 3, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 27, 28, 
29, 53, 60, 72, 89, 114, 157, 170, 185, 195, 
198, 216, 233, 246, 247, 255, 258, 267, 277, 
280, 289, 290, 291, 300, 302, 304, 308, 310, 
317, 318, 342, 348, 353, 362, 364, 377, 380, 
389, 390, 391, 394, 398, 418, 426, 459, 483, 502, 508, 510, 548, 551, 558, 585, 588, 589, 
596, 603, 608, 645, 646, 647, 666, 687, 693, 
694, 708  
Manuals  .. xxx, 41, 199, 255, 394, 397, 503, 548, 
558, 633, 666, 668, 669  
Manufacture  ... 69, 429, 441, 442, 445, 480, 481, 
482, 496, 513  
Manuscript  ................................ ...................  537 
Maps  ................................ ............................  426 
Mark  ................................ .............................  359 
Marketing  ..... 235, 236, 238, 240, 243, 297, 299, 
300, 301, 599, 616, 618, 619  
Marshalling  .. 304, 305, 306, 307, 313, 329, 348, 
349, 351, 352, 353  
Master  42, 46, 71, 103, 104, 127, 145, 182, 187, 
266, 267, 306, 308, 318, 319, 344, 346, 348, 
350, 351, 359, 365, 391, 455, 508, 509, 600, 
671 
Material  55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 143, 175, 
185, 187, 190, 194, 197, 209, 210, 211, 212, 
213, 214, 219, 222, 224, 227, 228, 229, 230, 
231, 255, 260, 263, 287, 298, 306, 310, 314, 
318, 323, 325, 329, 3 47, 366, 373, 375, 376, 
377, 382, 383, 389, 397, 403, 404, 406, 410, 
429, 434, 437, 439, 440, 442, 446, 461, 468, 
469, 475, 480, 486, 487, 490, 496, 499, 500, 
501, 506, 507, 512, 519, 520, 521, 523, 527, 
529, 531, 532, 536, 552, 571, 573, 580, 586, 
587, 59 6, 598, 606, 607, 608, 609, 660, 666, 
669, 671, 672, 681  
Materials  .. 56, 69, 156, 175, 187, 193, 194, 208, 
210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 223, 292, 298, 321, 
323, 332, 347, 389, 392, 395, 397, 399, 404, 
405, 408, 418, 441, 445, 460, 463, 464, 469, 
475, 476, 477, 4 78, 479, 480, 486, 487, 491, 
499, 500, 502, 506, 507, 511, 513, 520, 521, 
522, 524, 525, 526, 527, 528, 530, 531, 532, 
535, 537, 539, 540, 541, 544, 658, 660, 661, 
669, 671, 672, 683, 684  
Matrons  ................................ ........  152, 162, 167  
Maximum  ..... 43, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 75, 99, 105, 
121, 129, 130, 135, 136, 239, 270, 272, 303, 
306, 329, 338, 344, 351, 363, 364, 377, 391, 
484, 533  
MCDO  ... 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 209, 303, 327, 333, 
335, 424, 427, 553, 554, 557, 558, 563, 675, 
676, 677, 678, 679, 680  
MCF  ................................ ..... 466, 472, 496, 515  
Measured  ................................ ..............  526, 544  
 
 
745 
For internal use of IA&AD  Measurement  ...... 61, 62, 63, 190, 195, 210, 213, 
214, 216, 226, 271, 375, 410, 489, 490, 491, 
539, 540, 546, 680  
Measurement book  ................................ . 63, 226  
Measures  57, 165, 166, 237, 240, 241, 258, 264, 
281, 304, 342, 373, 375, 402, 408, 426, 437, 
454, 548, 550, 555, 559, 560, 562 , 568, 572, 
578, 590, 593, 594, 664  
Mechanical  ....... 2, 9, 35, 80, 218, 295, 357, 414, 
417, 421, 422, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 
430, 433, 434, 451, 454, 458, 464, 466, 467, 
485, 496, 515, 542, 548, 549, 555, 557, 563, 
564, 584, 661, 671, 675  
Mechanism  72, 90 , 127, 165, 178, 199, 454, 484  
Media  .... 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 28, 312, 373  
Medical  .... 2, 25, 26, 27, 52, 53, 96, 97, 99, 100, 
103, 111, 119, 121, 123, 134, 137, 139, 142, 
149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 
158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 
167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 186, 366, 381, 409, 
418, 428, 431, 432, 454, 466, 491, 496, 559, 
562, 563, 567, 575, 577, 584, 673, 675, 676, 
677, 679, 680, 682, 684, 685  
medically  ............................... 106, 134, 139, 163  
Medicines  ..... 152, 153, 156, 159, 160, 161, 162, 
164, 167, 168 , 169, 297, 323, 491, 492, 660, 
684, 685  
Meeting  .... 18, 19, 21, 25, 26, 30, 179, 181, 285, 
298, 300, 325, 554, 556, 557, 558, 606  
Mela  ................................ .............................  249 
Member  ...... 3, 6, 9, 17, 30, 33, 39, 93, 128, 147, 
173, 236, 295, 297, 366, 370, 372, 422, 424, 
425, 427, 466, 498, 583, 593,  605, 622  
Members  .... 16, 17, 33, 179, 181, 322, 395, 396, 
422, 550, 553, 593  
Memo  ............................  187, 216, 289, 581, 684  
Memorandum  ....... 138, 140, 170, 511, 581, 608, 
609, 624, 659, 687  
Merger  .............................  xxx, 1, 32, 77, 82, 552  
Meritorious  ................................ ..................  682 
Mess  ................................ ......493, 575, 581, 651  
Message  ................................ 185, 346, 392,  580 
Metallurgical  ................................ ................  669 
Meteorological  ................................ .............  408 
Methodology  ................................ ................  578 
Metro .............  156, 170, 187, 502, 662, 663, 665  
Metros  ................................ ..........................  665 
Micro ................................ ............................  508 
Microwave  ................................ ...........  393, 668  
Microwave towers  ................................ ........  668 Mid ................................ .......................  428, 660  
Midlife  ................................ .................  432, 464  
Midway  ................................ ........  675, 677, 680  
Migrate  ................................ .........................  688 
Mileage  ................................ .. 44, 114, 115, 317  
Military  ................................ ........  249, 250, 297  
MILRAIL  ................................ .............  297, 322  
Minister  ... 93, 284, 366, 550, 583, 695, 696, 697  
Ministry  .... xxx, 3, 16, 17, 18, 20, 32, 33, 34, 37, 
38, 39, 40, 100, 101, 129, 130, 150, 156, 
181, 187, 250, 285, 286, 297, 300, 327, 372, 
381, 388, 399, 409, 421, 502, 503, 512, 5 50, 
552, 573, 583, 584, 585, 593, 605, 608, 613, 
616, 617, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 624, 
625, 626, 627, 658, 659, 687  
Minor  ... 36, 76, 77, 96, 126, 176, 177, 286, 412, 
467 
Minutes  ...... 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 45, 179, 180, 
181, 321, 357, 363, 462, 574, 633, 6 78 
Misc  ..... 25, 26, 28, 90, 141, 158, 169, 209, 210, 
212, 213, 215, 216, 292, 410, 413, 486, 491, 
530, 532, 536, 671, 673, 681, 683, 687  
Miscellaneous  ...... 56, 65, 77, 78, 79, 81, 84, 87, 
138, 140, 185, 186, 190, 191, 215, 231, 248, 
266, 267, 276, 277, 289, 292, 31 7, 348, 412, 
439, 441, 462, 474, 475, 477, 480, 487, 489, 
490, 493, 494, 513, 536, 574, 594, 603, 683  
Miscellaneous Advance  ................................ . 65 
Misclassification  ................................ ............  90 
Mis-classifications  ................................ .........  90 
Mis-declaration  ............................  260, 271, 287  
Missing  103, 209, 215, 216, 293, 315, 487, 488, 
572 
Mission ................................ ........  149, 374, 664  
Misstatement  ................................ ................  587 
MLAs  ................................ .............  16, 285, 301  
Mobile  ........................... 285, 358, 379, 395, 557  
Mobilisation  ................................ .................  222 
Mock  ............................. 555, 558, 559, 562, 574  
Model  ................................ ... 186, 205, 206, 667  
modem  ................................ .........................  409 
Modern  ................................ .................  386, 496  
Modernization  ..............................  427, 440, 496  
Modification  ... 76, 190, 227, 228, 410, 426, 469,  
507, 510, 537, 556, 589, 590, 599, 661, 665  
Modifications  ....... 55, 63, 65, 89, 178, 375, 426, 
509, 510, 534, 561  
Modified ..................  96, 125, 137, 139, 290, 366  
Module  . 41, 42, 44, 45, 49, 50, 52, 98, 144, 156, 
167, 183, 184, 185, 187, 253, 314, 318, 319, 
INDEX  
 
746 
For internal use of IA&AD  320, 321, 359, 3 60, 366, 381, 433, 455, 456, 
507, 509, 516, 585, 660, 688, 689, 690, 691, 
692 
Modules  ... 40, 97, 157, 183, 318, 319, 407, 433, 
455, 456, 576, 687, 688  
Money  ................................ ..........................  249 
Monitoring  ... 38, 41, 50, 76, 128, 146, 150, 154, 
164, 165, 166, 174, 179, 182, 183, 186, 196, 
198, 2 04, 207, 231, 246, 284, 295, 298, 299, 
300, 301, 302, 304, 305, 308, 318, 323, 326, 
327, 330, 332, 333, 334, 340, 343, 357, 359, 
361, 363, 376, 381, 388, 389, 394, 397,398, 
399, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 426, 429, 430, 
454, 456, 457, 458, 509, 550, 551, 552 , 553, 
554, 555, 557, 558, 559, 560, 571, 572, 577, 
614, 627, 660, 664, 665, 666, 669, 672, 675, 
676, 679  
Monorail  ................................ ......................  662 
Month  . 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 52, 55, 65, 66, 
67, 68, 69, 70, 73, 74, 110, 111, 115, 116, 
117, 118, 120, 122, 134, 136, 138, 139, 140 , 
145, 179, 180, 183, 184, 229, 232, 265, 266, 
267, 269, 275, 280, 291, 309, 390, 391, 413, 
435, 438, 439, 440, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 
447, 448, 467, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 479, 
480, 481, 482, 483, 488, 494, 523, 529, 531, 
532, 533, 534, 536, 537, 538,  540, 557, 575, 
597, 606, 609  
Monthly  .... 28, 30, 46, 48, 56, 62, 65, 69, 73, 84, 
85, 86, 87, 88, 97, 110, 116, 117, 123, 129, 
130, 133, 135, 136, 160, 179, 181, 209, 211, 
213, 215, 228, 249, 269, 286, 297, 303, 324, 
328, 335, 390, 391, 419, 438, 439, 441, 442 , 
445, 446, 451, 469, 470, 471, 472, 475, 476, 
481, 486, 509, 510, 532, 533, 534, 535, 537, 
538, 550, 551, 553, 563, 672, 675, 676, 677, 
679, 680, 682  
Moorum  ................................ .........................  62 
MOR  .... 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 
641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 
650, 6 51, 652, 653, 654, 655  
Motive  .............................  79, 365, 421, 424, 428  
Motor  ............................  113, 129, 366, 441, 493  
Motor car  ................................ ....... 50, 115, 124  
Motor Van  ................................ ....................  366 
Motto ................................ ............................  373 
MoU  ..... 161, 170, 190, 361, 589, 600, 601, 633, 
634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 
643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 65 2, 653, 
654, 664, 675, 677, 680, 687  MPs ................................ ........  16, 285, 301, 552  
MR ........................  180, 249, 297, 324, 366, 391  
MSME  ................................ ..................  508, 509  
MSO  ................................ .......................  40, 511  
MTS  ................................ .............  100, 101, 102  
Multi  ............................. 403, 593, 622, 628, 671  
Multiple  ................................  365, 369, 464, 663  
Mumbai  ..... 7, 583, 620, 624, 628, 631, 632, 659  
Municipal  ..... 166, 195,  209, 210, 441, 454, 477, 
489, 599, 628  
Municipality  ................................ .................  195 
Muster  44, 52, 66, 210, 211, 212, 213, 439, 442, 
470, 471, 472, 474, 475, 486, 490, 491, 581  
Muster rolls  ................................ .. 212, 213, 442  
mutatis mutandis  ..........................  434, 435, 468  
Mutual  ................................ ..................  119, 205  
MWCD  ................................ ..........................  38 
N 
N.S. ................................ ..............................  509 
Narrative 214, 215, 374, 396, 462, 486, 489, 490  
National  .. 3, 41, 44, 49, 165, 241, 284, 285, 366, 
496, 553, 563, 572, 612, 619, 624, 625, 627, 
629, 644, 687  
Navi  ................................ ................................ .. 7 
NDMA  ................................ .................  552, 563  
NDRF  ................................ ... 552, 558, 562, 563  
NEFT  ................................ ...................  475, 496  
Negotiation  ................................ .............  96, 503  
network  .. 77, 164, 310, 320, 340, 3 42, 381, 409, 
416, 417, 618, 619, 621, 629, 687, 690  
Neutral  ................................ .........................  376 
New  16, 43, 47, 48, 54, 55, 57, 77, 83, 106, 108, 
109, 111, 116, 117, 129, 134, 139, 146, 151, 
155, 157, 173, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 195, 
196, 200, 202, 206, 218, 221, 227, 230, 236, 
238, 2 40, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 254, 255, 
263, 268, 273, 278, 284, 285,298, 299, 300, 
301, 322, 326, 330, 331, 337, 338, 366, 372, 
373, 379, 389, 392, 398, 402, 406, 407, 413, 
426, 427, 428, 436, 437, 450, 460, 467, 468, 
501, 509, 528, 538, 545, 579, 583, 606 , 611, 
617, 618, 621, 622, 623, 626, 627, 628, 656, 
658, 659, 661, 663, 665, 666, 668, 669, 670, 
671 
New lines  ..........  37, 77, 173, 200, 243, 298, 301  
New Service  ................................ .................  202 
New Services  ................................ ....... 202, 379  
Newspaper  23, 97, 102, 156, 178, 374, 401, 501, 
570, 594, 682  
 
 
747 
For internal use of IA&AD  Newspapers  ................................ .. 143, 237, 495  
NGO  ..............  573, 675, 676, 677, 679, 680, 682  
NHRCCL  ................................ ..... 612, 624, 644  
NIC ................................ ... 3, 284, 687, 688, 690  
NIDM  ................................ ...................  552, 563  
Nigam  ...........  372, 611, 618, 626, 629, 630, 636  
Night  .. 41, 44, 45, 186, 304, 347, 390, 471, 493, 
554, 556, 557, 560, 562  
Night Duty  ................................ .............  41, 471  
Nirbhaya  ................................ .36, 3 8, 77, 79, 84  
NIVARAN  ................................ ...............  97, 99  
NMS  ................................ .............................  314 
NOC  ................................ .............................  600 
Nodal ................................ .....323, 662, 663, 667  
Nomenclature  ................................ ....... 405, 520  
Nomination  .................  21, 45, 51, 117, 118, 690  
Non .... 25, 26, 27, 46, 78, 93, 94, 110, 137, 139, 
147, 160, 167, 184, 185, 205, 257, 258, 260, 
269, 280, 289, 298, 312, 313, 316, 323, 325, 
340, 341, 342, 348, 350, 351, 356, 357, 381, 
395, 405, 425, 459, 461, 462, 501, 507, 509, 
520, 545, 546, 551, 555, 572, 577, 597, 617  
Non gazetted  25, 26, 27, 41, 129, 131, 147, 673, 
678, 680, 684, 685  
Non issue  ................................ ..... 249, 250, 251  
Non-issued  ................................ ...................  290 
non-moving  ................................ .. 461, 519, 546  
Norms  .. 107, 125, 129, 181, 194, 195, 200, 377, 
405, 411, 470, 511, 551, 554, 559, 560, 574, 
580, 598, 659  
North  ................................ ........................  7, 693  
Northeast  ................................ ..........................  7 
Northern  ...... 7, 13, 156, 371, 466, 625, 693, 694  
Notarised  ................................ ......................  221 
Note book  ................................ .....................  681 
Notes  .... 64, 72, 74, 75, 139, 140, 1 41, 142, 143, 
165, 185, 199, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
216, 233, 237, 260, 264, 265, 272, 276, 287, 
288, 292, 297, 322, 324, 343, 389, 395, 396, 
398, 440, 441, 459, 461, 462, 463, 475, 476, 
486, 487, 489, 490, 492, 493, 495,500, 511, 
526, 530, 531, 532 , 536, 545, 546, 553, 586, 
588, 594, 603, 608, 613, 681, 683, 684  
Noting  ................................ ..........................  688 
NPS ................................ ......... 50, 144, 594, 602  
NR Cell  ................................ ................  267, 268  
NRTU  ................................ ..........  612, 629, 651  
NRUCC  ................................ ................  241, 285  
NS demand  ................................ ...........  508, 510  
NTES  ....................  314, 317, 320, 321, 359, 366  NUCARS  ................................ .....................  661 
Numerical ................................ ....... 77, 500, 533  
NWR  ................................ ............................  662 
O 
O&BD  ................................ ..........  6, 9, 236, 297  
OBHS  ................................ ...........  429, 458, 464  
Objectionable  ............  55, 56, 229, 230, 232, 569  
Objective  .. 14, 37, 128, 187, 198, 207, 208, 219, 
246, 303, 338, 361, 417, 450, 456, 523, 614, 
616, 618, 620, 621, 623, 629, 667, 671, 693  
Objectives  .... 206, 207, 263, 295, 303, 309, 316, 
318, 348, 380, 584, 586, 588, 589, 590, 596, 
608, 619, 663, 670  
ODC  ......................  186, 301, 303, 335, 346, 366  
OEM  ............................. 199, 220, 376, 377, 403  
Office  . 24, 25, 26, 27, 41, 42, 45, 47, 52, 55, 58, 
64, 65, 70, 75, 91, 101, 103, 109, 123, 137, 
138, 140, 142, 158, 189, 193, 195, 20 1, 203, 
210, 225, 229, 245, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 
275, 276, 279, 280, 284, 286, 287, 303, 307, 
310, 314, 317, 329, 343, 346, 365, 371, 378, 
393, 409, 413, 425, 435, 438, 448, 456, 468, 
476, 478, 482, 487, 488, 494, 528, 534, 540, 
541, 556, 562, 611, 617 , 658, 682, 687, 690  
OHE  ..............  184, 186, 344, 358, 369, 373, 550  
OIOS  ................................ ........  3, 708, 709, 710  
OLWR  ................................ ....................  63, 412  
OMS  ................................ .....................  186, 664  
On account  ... 37, 60, 61, 62, 68, 69, 73, 91, 123, 
125, 132, 151, 189, 192, 193, 227, 232, 256, 
260, 261, 273, 280, 353, 374, 391, 444, 445, 
471, 478, 5 21, 524, 525, 538, 540, 562  
On Cost  ........................... 68, 444, 446, 447, 479  
Ongoing  ........  231, 291, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679  
Online  ...... 21, 30, 156, 159, 178, 187, 248, 250, 
277, 284, 299, 318, 320, 342, 354, 399, 502, 
503, 505, 506, 508, 509, 510, 511, 516, 585, 
589, 660, 687, 690, 691 
OPD  .............................. 153, 156, 161, 170, 673  
Open  ....... 83, 104, 106, 173, 174, 209, 220, 300, 
372, 386, 389, 393, 396, 467, 520, 672  
Open Line  ................................ .... 173, 393, 512  
Operate  ................................ . 206, 616, 621, 627  
Operating  ..... 1, 2, 16, 80, 81, 90, 119, 236, 246, 
295, 297, 298, 300, 301, 303, 307, 308, 309 , 
310, 311, 312, 313, 324, 327, 331, 333, 335, 
337, 340, 344, 348, 366, 377, 412, 417, 543, 
549, 551, 558, 563, 573, 574, 584, 667  
INDEX  
 
748 
For internal use of IA&AD  Operation  16, 24, 67, 77, 81, 111, 116, 198, 199, 
203, 263, 273, 298, 301, 303, 306, 308, 309, 
313, 315, 317, 327, 329, 332, 338, 340, 341, 
343, 349, 362, 369, 375, 376, 386, 402, 426, 
428, 429, 439, 443, 479, 548, 551, 553, 554, 
560, 567, 616, 617, 618, 622, 625, 629, 658, 
661, 663  
Operational ... 106, 107, 259, 285, 295, 297, 300, 
306, 307, 317, 318, 326, 337, 338, 352, 361, 
402, 593, 596, 619, 662, 667  
Operations  ...... xxx, 17, 45, 68, 70, 71, 105, 149, 
150, 154, 164, 168, 201, 205, 206, 207, 236, 
244, 246, 295, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 
304, 305, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 314, 317, 
318, 324, 327, 328, 331, 332, 334, 337, 338, 
341, 3 48, 349, 351, 354, 359, 361, 362, 364, 
365, 366, 375, 376, 381, 386, 403, 404, 421, 
426, 428, 433, 434, 445, 455, 456, 479, 484, 
486, 498, 501, 554, 555, 574, 584, 585, 587, 
590, 591, 616, 617, 620, 626, 628, 629, 662, 
667 
Opinion  . 128, 163, 203, 230, 585, 586, 599, 607  
Optical  ................................ ..................  392, 409  
Optimum  ...... 124, 194, 295, 299, 301, 316, 318, 
319, 329, 332, 338, 341, 342, 376, 403, 405, 
518 
Option  ................................ ....................  47, 524  
Organisation  ... 17, 20, 23, 24, 28, 32, 33, 64, 81, 
100, 111, 132, 133, 149, 170, 173, 174, 175, 
198, 209, 214, 218, 235,  237, 239, 250, 296, 
297, 299, 300, 302, 303, 325, 330, 334, 344, 
366, 370, 372, 387, 388, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
397, 400, 402, 403, 404, 440, 460, 464,477, 
498, 523, 524, 548, 549, 550, 553, 554, 555, 
564, 567, 583, 593, 595, 596, 611, 619, 620, 
621, 658, 6 67, 669, 672, 682  
Organisations  ...............................  173, 250, 393  
organizations  .. 1, 2, 79, 100, 207, 396, 404, 606, 
671, 680  
Originating  .... 248, 297, 313, 315, 318, 319, 324  
Oscillation  ................................ ....................  662 
Oscillograph  ................................ .................  678 
OSD  ................................ .............................  314 
Out agencies  ................................ ...........  74, 241  
Outdoor  ................................ .153, 161, 167, 684  
Outlay  .. 59, 66, 69 , 77, 190, 203, 227, 231, 442, 
445, 446, 469, 481, 626  
output  ... 128, 207, 299, 308, 321, 349, 360, 473, 
483, 484, 659  Outsourcing  .... 24, 197, 362, 449, 460, 570, 579, 
684, 685  
Outstanding  .... 48, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 73, 82, 83, 
84, 136, 240, 246, 267, 276, 279, 280 , 281, 
288, 291, 297, 309, 315, 316, 322, 324, 445, 
446, 448, 459, 469, 481, 482, 494, 529, 532, 
534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 542, 577, 590, 597, 
598, 608  
Outstation  ................................ .....................  113 
Outturn  ..... 68, 69, 434, 438, 444, 445, 446, 474, 
475, 481, 528, 534  
Out-turn Statement  ................................ ....... 481 
Outward  ................  244, 265, 266, 316, 345, 346  
Over  . 47, 82, 144, 184, 264, 271, 300, 307, 344, 
366, 367, 369, 373, 431, 432, 443, 455, 464, 
501, 509, 545, 557, 564, 665  
Over Head  ................................ .... 369, 373, 665  
Over time  ...............................  47, 317, 409, 443  
Overcharges  ............  75, 236, 267, 291, 479, 481  
Overhau l...............................  366, 428, 449, 450  
Overhauling  . 184, 185, 186, 193, 198, 390, 432, 
434 
Overhauls  ................................ .....................  467 
Overheads  ................................ .... 446, 477, 478  
Overloading  ................................ .................  261 
Oversight  ................................ ..............  207, 671  
Oversized  ................................ .....................  305 
Overstock  ................................ ..... 509, 545, 546  
Overtime  .... 41, 47, 66, 103, 124, 315, 438, 439, 
442, 443, 470, 471, 472  
Own ed .. 371, 432, 436, 451, 460, 619, 620, 621, 
627, 628, 629  
P 
P.O.507, 508, 509, 510, 523, 525, 526, 527, 544  
P.T.Os  ... 138, 140, 141, 142, 211, 212, 214, 215  
PAC  ................................ ..............  159, 170, 520  
Paint  ................................ .....................  486, 669  
Pakistan  ................................ ..........................  13 
PAM  ......................  318, 319, 358, 359, 366, 456  
PAN  ................................ ...............................  51 
Panel  .....................  183, 186, 3 86, 400, 401, 564  
paperless ................................ ...........  3, 317, 687  
PAR  ................................ ......................  690, 691  
Para 17, 18, 20, 21, 27, 28, 39, 40, 61, 101, 102, 
107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 131, 133, 134, 135, 
155, 157, 158, 159, 162, 163, 164, 188, 189, 
190, 191, 193, 19 4, 195, 198, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 206, 207, 220, 221, 223,225, 227, 228, 
 
 
749 
For internal use of IA&AD  230, 232, 236, 245, 246, 255, 257, 258, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 268, 269, 272, 274, 275, 276, 
280, 281, 286, 301, 314, 328, 329, 333, 343, 
345, 347, 349, 350, 351, 353, 354, 356, 357, 
358, 359, 360, 362, 363, 364, 371, 372, 373, 
374, 375, 377, 378, 380, 381, 391, 401, 435, 
436, 437, 440, 441, 442, 445, 446, 447, 449, 
450, 451, 452, 455, 458, 469, 470, 474, 475, 
476, 477, 478, 480, 481, 482, 483, 484, 499, 
501, 502, 512, 526, 535, 537, 551, 562, 577, 
583, 584, 590, 608, 659  
Paragraph  . 65, 69, 439, 440, 445, 448, 453, 468, 
469, 476, 479, 595  
Paragraphs  68, 70, 374, 437, 438, 445, 448, 449, 
452, 468, 528  
Parameters  .... xxx, 23, 40, 70, 97, 149, 155, 178, 
181, 245, 311, 374, 401, 402, 433, 484, 501, 
511, 559, 570, 594, 614, 661, 689  
Paras  ....... 89, 191, 193, 201, 298, 322, 442, 469, 
477, 511, 539  
Parcel  ... 70, 71, 74, 81, 186, 235, 237, 238, 239, 
240, 243, 244, 245, 253, 255, 268, 270, 271, 
272, 276, 278, 291, 295, 325, 329, 584  
Parcels  .... 71, 238, 240, 242, 268,  271, 287, 291, 
293, 301, 337  
Parking  ................................ .................  245, 688  
Parliament  4, 10, 12, 16, 20, 23, 30, 32, 76, 200, 
202, 254, 297, 301, 312, 322, 324, 332, 366, 
550, 566, 695, 697, 706  
Parliamentary  ..... 20, 23, 97, 297, 324, 396, 430, 
550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555  
Part-I ...............................  14, 136 , 137, 485, 601  
Part-II ......................  14, 120, 135, 136, 267, 485  
Partnership  ....................  204, 354, 380, 411, 624  
Pass .... 25, 26, 27, 121, 122, 133, 185, 289, 488, 
545, 577, 602  
Passenger  ..... xxx, 44, 45, 70, 71, 74, 78, 81, 82, 
164, 176, 178, 181, 196, 205, 235, 236, 237, 
239, 240, 242, 243, 244, 245, 250, 268, 269, 
270, 272, 273, 276, 277, 283, 290, 295, 297, 
298, 299, 300, 301, 303, 305, 306, 307, 308, 
312, 313, 318, 325, 327, 328, 329, 330, 337, 
338, 340, 341, 344, 345, 348, 352, 360, 365, 
369, 375, 376, 377, 379, 380, 386, 395, 397, 
398, 403, 404, 412, 421, 425, 427, 429, 431, 
432, 456, 457, 459, 559, 566, 569, 575, 584, 
617, 623, 624, 628, 661  
Passengers  37, 71, 149, 151, 154, 164, 166, 168, 
196, 199, 235, 236, 238, 242, 248, 249, 250, 
268, 270, 272, 273, 277, 282, 295, 299, 312, 329, 338, 364, 379, 434, 550, 566, 568, 575, 
628 
Passes  . 27, 94, 95, 121, 122, 126, 133, 138, 140, 
141, 142, 143, 169, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
293, 346, 442, 470, 486, 487, 488, 491, 492, 
495, 531, 544, 546, 602, 608, 675, 676, 679, 
681, 682, 683, 685  
Patents  ................................ ..........................  426 
Pathology  ................................ .....................  684 
Patrolling  ................................ ......................  575 
Pay ... xxx, 25, 26, 27, 33, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 59, 66, 69, 72, 
79, 80, 81, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, 104, 106, 
108, 109, 110, 112, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 
120, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 144, 145, 146, 155, 
158, 161, 162, 177, 191, 206, 211, 215, 216, 
231, 248, 258, 259, 265, 266, 267, 268, 277, 
292, 293, 343, 346, 355, 356, 380, 401, 410, 
436, 437, 439, 442, 445, 453, 463, 469, 470, 
471, 472, 474, 475, 4 88, 489, 493, 494, 496, 
545, 567, 570, 574, 576, 577, 578, 585, 594, 
602, 603, 622, 623, 681, 685  
Payroll  ...............  40, 95, 176, 183, 434, 511, 660  
PC .. 50, 107, 114, 115, 124, 126, 130, 147, 361, 
366, 556  
PCC  ................................ ......................  258, 259  
PCCM  ................................ ..........................  236 
PCDO  ..... 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 185, 209, 374, 396, 
424, 427, 462, 545, 675, 676, 677, 679, 680, 
684 
PCE ................................ ......................  223, 496  
PCEE  ..... 370, 371, 372, 382, 383, 384, 466, 496  
PCMD  ................................ ..........  149, 164, 170  
PCME  ................................ .. 424, 427, 466, 496  
PCMM  ..........  466, 496, 499, 504, 519, 540, 541  
PCOM  ...................  300, 303, 309, 324, 327, 366  
PCPO  ................................ ..... 94, 133, 466, 496  
PCSO  ................................ ...........  549, 555, 558  
PCSTE  ................................ .........  388, 394, 396  
PCV  ................................ ..............................  366 
PDA  ................  90, 496, 611, 614, 615, 693, 695  
PED  ...................  39, 93, 147, 170, 236, 549, 563  
Penal  ................................ ............  260, 600, 601  
Penalties  ... 58, 96, 126, 224, 488, 495, 546, 579, 
681, 685, 690  
Penalty  ..... 42, 90, 119, 123, 124, 134, 261, 341, 
527, 541, 572,  633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 639, 
640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 
649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
INDEX  
 
750 
For internal use of IA&AD  Pending  .. 21, 22, 28, 74, 97, 186, 225, 246, 268, 
275, 280, 315, 364, 460, 503, 508, 509, 544, 
572, 689, 690  
Pension  ..... 37, 40, 49, 51, 77, 81, 82, 90, 96, 97, 
98, 116, 134, 135, 136, 137, 577  
Percentage  43, 51, 52, 56, 58, 66, 67, 68, 74, 75, 
110, 190, 195, 206, 222, 319, 329, 376, 443, 
446, 469, 472, 478, 480, 481, 524, 525, 534, 
535, 578  
Performance  ....... xxx, 2, 14, 21, 28, 30, 95, 113, 
119, 125, 187, 207, 216,  223, 233, 268, 279, 
297, 299, 301, 304, 309, 311, 313, 315, 316, 
319, 320, 321, 324, 328, 329, 332, 333, 343, 
345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 353, 354, 
356, 359, 363, 364, 375, 376, 378, 380, 381, 
395, 396, 397, 401, 405, 416, 418, 429, 430, 
462, 484, 488, 509, 510, 514, 515, 517, 523, 
529, 551, 552, 585, 587, 614, 634, 635, 636, 
637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 
648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 658, 659, 
660, 663, 670, 675, 676, 687, 690, 691, 694, 
709 
Periodic  ................................ ........................  253 
periodical  ................................ 13, 209, 377,  422 
Periodical 20, 29, 30, 67, 73, 107, 109, 119, 151, 
153, 163, 164, 167, 168, 186, 187, 194, 249, 
253, 258, 269, 270, 274, 279, 297, 299, 324, 
361, 366, 381, 391, 392, 405, 421, 428, 432, 
444, 449, 450, 462, 473, 481, 528, 532, 545, 
574, 682, 685  
Period icals ................................ ....................  685 
Periodicity  .....................  107, 193, 376, 539, 660  
Perishable  ................................ .............  271, 279  
Permanent  .... 52, 79, 93, 96, 114, 117, 123, 129, 
174, 186, 197, 199, 200, 210, 319, 326, 329, 
353, 469, 622, 669  
Permissible  ................................ ...................  259 
Personal  .... 46, 99, 103, 130, 147, 297, 323, 366, 
572, 577  
Personne l . 16, 20, 30, 93, 94, 97, 102, 105, 118, 
120, 128, 130, 132, 133, 137, 139, 143, 147, 
167, 292, 404, 424, 464, 466, 488, 496, 577, 
584, 618, 660, 673, 681, 687, 690  
Petroleum  ................................ ..........  366, 499  
Petty 56, 214, 215, 216, 223, 332, 487, 492, 537, 
572, 681  
PF ... 40, 49, 97 , 98, 99, 116, 118, 146, 184, 493, 
494, 496, 577  
PFA ................................ ..............  146, 466, 496  
PFRDA  ................................ ..........................  50 PG ................................ .223, 224, 225, 226, 284  
PGCIL  ................................ ..........................  372 
Pharmacists  ................................ ..................  684 
PHOD  ........................... 453, 459, 464, 554, 564  
Physical  .... 55, 84, 142, 175, 179, 182, 208, 214, 
215, 225, 230, 233, 247, 257, 342, 360, 514, 
533, 5 75, 578, 595, 597, 598, 628, 633, 660, 
675, 676, 679, 688, 690  
Piece  ................................ ..... 438, 472, 484, 659  
Piece work ................................ ............  472, 473  
Pilferage  ................  264, 458, 569, 572, 581, 683  
Pilgrim  ................................ .........................  290 
Pilot  ................................ ..............................  382 
Pilots  ...... 45, 113, 306, 307, 308, 311, 316, 348, 
357, 358, 380, 553  
PIMS  ................................ ............  660, 687, 690  
Pink Book  ...............  77, 178, 200, 201, 422, 436  
Pipavav ................................ .........  612, 626, 646  
Pivot  ................................ .............  455, 456, 663  
PL ................................ .................  499, 500, 507  
Plan ...... 70, 77, 79, 99, 181, 186, 297, 300, 301, 
308, 311, 318, 323, 324, 325, 338, 347, 353, 
361, 362, 365, 367, 390, 394, 396, 397, 406, 
464, 484, 485, 550, 552, 5 53, 554, 555, 556, 
557, 559, 561, 562, 600, 659  
Plan Head  ................................ .............  181, 464  
Planning  . 24, 32, 40, 94, 95, 100, 147, 149, 150, 
154, 155, 157, 160, 168, 178, 184, 186, 188, 
196, 198, 208, 246, 254, 295, 296, 297, 299, 
301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 308, 309, 310, 312, 
317, 318, 319, 322, 323, 326, 327, 330, 331, 
336, 338, 340, 341, 342, 348, 349, 365, 369, 
370, 371, 373, 381, 388, 396, 406, 421, 424, 
425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 450, 456, 467, 477, 
484, 488, 498, 499, 513, 555, 559, 563, 593, 
618, 619, 622, 627, 629, 659  
Plans  ..... 107, 174, 175, 190, 197, 220, 301, 303, 
336, 344, 389, 398, 421, 456, 599  
Plant 78, 141, 142, 157, 203, 212, 213, 215, 216, 
346, 411, 412, 421, 426, 427, 430, 431, 433, 
446, 452, 464, 477, 478, 485, 486, 489, 491, 
492, 493, 495, 570, 591, 614, 670, 675, 676 , 
679, 680, 683, 685  
Plants  .... 151, 158, 159, 162, 170, 171, 187, 216, 
327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 346, 
366, 427, 454, 462, 464, 660, 671, 678, 680, 
684, 685  
Platforms  ................................ ...... 238, 241, 278  
PLIL  ................................ .............  611, 621, 641  
PM ................................ .236, 297, 324, 325, 366  
 
 
751 
For internal use of IA&AD  PME  ..............  316, 347, 358, 366, 554, 558, 564  
PMIS  ................................ ....................  660, 676  
PMO  ................................ ....19, 22, 28, 284, 552  
PMS  ..........................  41, 70, 244, 245, 253, 271  
PNM  ................................ .........  93, 96, 297, 322  
POH  ..... 318, 322, 366, 376, 432, 436, 450, 451, 
452, 455, 458, 459, 460, 461, 464  
Point & Crossing  ................................ .. 184, 185  
Points and crossings  .............................  192, 665  
Police  ... 123, 249, 250, 251, 274, 275, 326, 344, 
566, 567, 568, 569, 573, 574, 577  
Police Vouchers  ................................ ...........  274 
Policy  . 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 32, 50, 54, 57, 79, 93, 
94, 104, 130, 131, 149, 150, 159, 202, 214, 
221, 222, 240, 242, 243, 244, 255, 268, 270, 
281, 285, 286, 298, 301, 30 3, 308, 310, 322, 
325, 326, 343, 362, 372, 388, 393, 394, 395, 
399, 426, 429, 462, 479, 489, 490, 493, 499, 
520, 521, 542, 545, 546, 557, 583, 586, 588, 
589, 595, 605, 614, 619, 673  
Pollution  ................................ ...............  454, 464  
POM  ................................ ......18, 21, 25, 30, 556  
Port ................  205, 341, 356, 527, 583, 6 25, 626  
Portal  ...... 99, 156, 187, 225, 300, 381, 502, 504, 
505, 516, 670, 672, 692  
Porters  ................................ ...288, 289, 291, 293  
Post 41, 42, 43, 46, 96, 100, 101, 104, 108, 114, 
119, 121, 122, 125, 126, 134, 137, 139, 163, 
184, 187, 203, 221, 237, 245, 273, 282, 318, 
344, 380, 4 08, 436, 475, 523, 567, 568, 571, 
572, 573, 574, 597, 602, 673  
Postal .......................  84, 275, 325, 432, 436, 470  
Posters  ................................ ..................  556, 560  
Postponement  ................................ .................  42 
Posts  ....... 24, 27, 41, 42, 45, 93, 94, 95, 98, 100, 
101, 102, 105, 108, 113, 118, 119, 137, 139, 
155, 177, 275, 396, 401, 468, 488 , 493, 495, 
555, 568, 575, 576, 578, 682  
Potentiality  ................................ ...................  599 
Power 24, 62, 79, 89, 94, 95, 100, 113, 147, 179, 
180, 186, 203, 282, 300, 301, 304, 305, 308, 
310, 311, 315, 331, 332, 335, 336, 338, 340, 
341, 353, 354, 360, 365, 369, 371, 372, 375, 
376, 378, 396 , 421, 424, 428, 429, 435, 460, 
488, 490, 499, 542, 590, 614, 623, 645, 646, 
647, 662, 663, 664, 671, 675, 676  
PPO ................................ ..............................  672 
PPP . 39, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 216, 233, 237, 
263, 354  Practice ... 55, 164, 303, 342, 446, 512, 544, 550, 
580, 666  
Practising  ................................ .......................  46 
PRAN  ................................ .....................  49, 117 
PREM  ...........  18, 30, 93, 96, 297, 322, 550, 556  
Premature  ................................ ..... 134, 198, 460  
Premier  ................................ .................  255, 658  
Prepaid  ................................ .........................  598 
Preparation  ..... 94, 150, 152, 156, 174, 175, 176, 
189, 288, 291, 297, 300, 301, 303, 311, 315, 
322, 335, 371, 372, 389, 396, 398, 400, 426, 
500, 506, 507, 550, 552 , 554, 555, 556, 557, 
558, 559, 666, 668  
Prescribed . 28, 38, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 55, 
56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 73, 75, 104, 
106, 107, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 
120, 124, 125, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 
158, 159, 163, 164, 169, 195,  220, 221, 222, 
223, 226, 227, 229, 231, 255, 256, 261, 263, 
272, 273, 274, 278, 288, 291, 305, 327, 330, 
331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 338, 354, 355, 
356, 378, 390, 436, 437, 438, 441, 449, 453, 
460, 471, 472, 476, 479, 521, 522, 525, 526, 
528, 530, 532, 535, 539, 542, 560, 574, 575, 
576, 577, 578, 579, 580, 585, 586, 588, 589, 
590, 594, 596  
Presenting Officer  ............................  19, 30, 282  
President . 10, 11, 12, 13, 57, 104, 126, 129, 130, 
202, 222, 225, 254, 282, 284, 297, 324, 325, 
605, 606  
PRESS  ................................ ..................  251, 321  
Prevention  ................................ .... 454, 5 69, 573  
Preventive 28, 149, 151, 264, 548, 550, 553, 560  
Price List  ................................ ......................  545 
Priced ledgers  ..........  64, 526, 529, 532, 533, 540  
Prime  ................................ .... 284, 366, 695, 697  
Principal  . 3, 5, 12, 13, 17, 18, 21, 25, 30, 33, 39, 
93, 94, 105, 122, 130, 132, 133, 139, 147, 
149, 170, 173, 174, 1 98, 208, 236, 295, 297, 
300, 302, 327, 328, 335, 366, 372, 424, 427, 
464, 466, 485, 486, 488, 489, 490, 496, 498, 
499, 512, 513, 519, 549, 555, 563, 564, 567, 
568, 569, 578, 611, 672, 695, 706  
Principal Director  ............ 3, 5, 13, 466, 695, 706  
Principles  57, 192, 233, 348, 351, 413, 444, 478, 
479, 511, 586, 588, 594  
Printed  ...... 65, 66, 67, 69, 72, 74, 248, 273, 289, 
442, 443, 444, 445, 471, 472, 473, 474, 479, 
532, 534, 535, 536  
Printing presses  ................................ .... 499, 535  
INDEX  
 
752 
For internal use of IA&AD  Prior  ................................ .....................  196, 591  
Private  ...... 36, 63, 129, 134, 140, 161, 162, 168, 
175, 177, 189, 192, 204, 205, 208, 210, 228, 
233, 243, 244, 262, 274, 283, 289, 290, 291, 
307, 331, 340, 347, 348, 354, 380, 391, 397, 
411, 425, 432, 434, 451, 453, 458, 459, 460, 
468, 469, 471, 485, 535, 623, 624, 665, 667, 
671, 685  
Privilege  ..................  30, 121, 122, 12 6, 133, 496  
Privileges  .............................. 105, 360, 362, 690  
Probation  ................................ ......................  103 
Procedure 94, 332, 395, 403, 475, 569, 573, 574, 
589, 599, 600, 691  
Procedures  ................................ ....................  587 
Procurement  . xxx, 25, 27, 28, 36, 152, 156, 158, 
159, 162, 170, 176, 187, 243, 298, 313, 320, 
327, 330, 331, 332, 333,  334, 335, 336, 343, 
369, 370, 373, 375, 380, 382, 395, 398, 399, 
400, 421, 426, 427, 429, 431, 434, 458, 459, 
460, 467, 490, 498, 499, 500, 501, 502,504, 
506, 508, 514, 516, 520, 522, 539, 560, 578, 
579, 584, 606, 609, 621, 660, 678, 679, 684  
Product  ................................ .................  660, 661 
Production  ...... 2, 9, 17, 47, 67, 78, 82, 101, 102, 
104, 110, 111, 128, 156, 158, 187, 308, 320, 
322, 325, 326, 362, 369, 388, 394, 418, 421, 
422, 424, 425, 427, 429, 440, 442, 443, 446, 
447, 466, 467, 469, 470, 471, 475, 477, 478, 
479, 480, 483, 485, 486,  496, 502, 509,513, 
514, 516, 519, 584, 606, 609, 658, 659, 663, 
671 
Productivity  47, 93, 96, 128, 138, 139, 203, 315, 
317, 364, 380, 396, 406, 438, 472, 498, 577  
Profession  ................................ ......................  50 
Profit  68, 82, 132, 162, 237, 240, 342, 438, 470, 
472, 477, 483, 589, 591, 597,  613, 614, 629  
Profits  ..............  68, 207, 438, 444, 452, 472, 473  
Proforma  ...........  66, 68, 437, 442, 444, 446, 449  
Proforma invoice  ................................ ..........  527 
Programme  . 53, 66, 77, 138, 140, 150, 151, 157, 
158, 165, 167, 170, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 188, 194, 199, 214, 274, 324, 325, 367, 
374, 389, 391, 397, 400, 405, 408, 410, 421, 
422, 425, 426, 427, 430, 431, 433, 458, 464, 
467, 468, 479, 485, 490, 493, 511, 529, 532, 
540, 557, 619, 670, 681, 682  
programs  ................................ ................  14, 587  
Progress  178, 179, 180, 181, 186, 187, 199, 209, 
211, 424, 486, 491, 503, 50 8, 509, 510, 675, 
676, 677, 679, 680  progressive  .........................  55, 69, 86, 351, 445  
Project  .. 176, 179, 181, 203, 204, 218, 361, 362, 
371, 380, 386, 393, 395, 397, 404, 406, 407, 
425, 593, 616, 617, 618, 619, 624, 627, 651, 
660 
Projections  ................................ ...................  667 
Projects ... 78, 174, 175, 178, 179, 188, 197, 204, 
205, 206, 207, 218, 233, 322, 331, 370, 372, 
380, 388, 389, 393, 396, 397, 399, 400, 406, 
411, 413, 434, 584, 616, 618, 619, 621, 622, 
623, 624, 629, 651, 664, 675, 676, 677, 678, 
679, 680  
Proliferation  ................................ .................  660 
Promotion . 2, 42, 50, 94, 97, 102, 103, 104, 107, 
109, 119, 120, 125, 126, 137, 139, 429, 471, 
567, 605, 682  
Proof Book  ................................ ...................  289 
Propelling  ................................ .....................  366 
Proper  ..... 57, 138, 140, 166, 190, 197, 199, 220, 
223, 278, 299, 408, 427, 428, 460, 473, 484, 
488, 495, 500, 559, 578, 659  
Property  ...... 20, 23, 51, 110, 2 01, 279, 291, 453, 
566, 567, 568, 569, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 
581, 587  
Proportionate  ................................ ........  110, 195  
Proprietary  ...........................  159, 170, 520, 521  
Propriety ....... 14, 53, 54, 59, 118, 157, 188, 219, 
231, 435, 468, 523, 588, 602, 603  
Protection  . 75, 93, 126, 184, 186, 199, 399, 432, 
453, 454, 566, 567, 568, 569, 573, 575, 576  
Provident  ...... 37, 49, 81, 98, 116, 131, 471, 483, 
496, 567, 598, 602  
Provision  ...... 139, 154, 179, 240, 241, 243, 245, 
247, 272, 283, 325, 354, 377, 401, 425, 453, 
559, 560, 586, 625, 673  
Provisional  ................................ ...................  440 
PRS .... xxx, 41, 70, 71, 236, 239, 241, 244, 245, 
250, 253, 254, 269, 273, 274, 286, 321, 395, 
404, 417, 418  
PSR ................................ ..............................  555 
PSU .................  78, 170, 372, 620, 623, 625, 629  
PSUs  2, 156, 187, 284, 372, 446, 502, 611, 633, 
675, 676, 677, 680  
Psycho  ................................ ..........  554, 670, 680  
Psychology  ................................ ...................  576 
PTO  ................................ ........  30, 122, 496, 54 5 
Public 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 28, 32, 36, 57, 101, 
102, 111, 114, 119, 134, 159, 163, 170, 175, 
197, 199, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 220, 233, 
235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 244, 250, 264, 273, 
 
 
753 
For internal use of IA&AD  284, 285, 301, 308, 323, 325, 326, 328, 331, 
333, 350, 354, 373, 38 0, 392, 409, 411, 436, 
484, 503, 513, 520, 521, 540, 550, 552, 588, 
624, 628, 659, 660, 662, 667, 670, 671  
Publication  ... 246, 503, 506, 507, 558, 670, 671, 
682 
Pulling  ................................ ..................  357, 566  
Pulse  ................................ .....................  154, 168  
Punctual  ................................ 299, 306, 330, 456  
Punctuality  ... 295, 298, 299, 301, 303, 3 04, 305, 
312, 313, 318, 319, 324, 325, 326, 328, 329, 
330, 332, 333, 336, 340, 345, 358, 359, 366, 
395, 396, 428, 434, 456, 457  
Punishments  ................................ .................  551 
Punitive  ................................ ........................  261 
Purchase  ... 25, 27, 38, 50, 64, 65, 129, 130, 143, 
151, 152, 155, 156, 158, 159, 168, 177, 210, 
222, 2 72, 273, 400, 404, 405, 450, 461, 463, 
487, 488, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495, 499, 500, 
501, 507, 508, 509, 510, 519, 520, 521, 522, 
523, 524, 525, 526, 530, 535, 537, 538, 542, 
545, 546, 584, 607, 617, 671, 672, 681, 682, 
683, 684  
Purchase Orders  ... 155, 461, 48 7, 519, 521, 525, 
545 
Purchases  ................................ .............  542, 683  
PUs . 99, 178, 179, 422, 425, 466, 472, 505, 658, 
661, 663, 676, 677  
PVC ................................ ......................  222, 224  
PWP  ................................ .............  179, 181, 396  
Q 
Qualification  103, 104, 105, 118, 137, 139, 651, 
690 
Qualifying  ............................... 51, 135, 136, 690  
Quality  . 128, 149, 150, 151, 154, 160, 166, 168, 
205, 312, 314, 338, 362, 364, 376, 389, 395, 
426, 429, 434, 451, 460, 466, 484, 492, 496, 
515, 517, 519, 523, 526, 541, 544, 622, 627, 
659, 661, 663, 665, 666, 669, 671, 676, 677  
Quantum  .. 23, 97, 155, 178, 245, 311, 374, 401, 
501, 570, 594  
Quarters  .... 43, 48, 49, 56, 96, 98, 109, 118, 131, 
132, 139, 141, 176, 195, 197, 210, 223, 285, 
309, 310, 352, 409, 558, 581, 597  
Queries  ................................ .........  202, 507, 508  
Question  ................................ ....... 141, 142, 407  
Questions  . 75, 97, 254, 297, 324, 357, 396, 430, 
555 
Quota ................................ .......95, 102, 104, 254  R 
R Note  ................................ ..........................  510 
R&D  ................................ ..... 658, 664, 671, 672  
R.M.C  ................................ ..........  212, 214, 487  
R/C ................................ ..............................  499 
R/Note  ................................ ..........  508, 509, 510  
Radiology  ................................ .............  156, 673  
Rail ....... 113, 156, 170, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 
193, 205, 206, 241, 267, 283, 284, 338, 342, 
354, 355, 356, 365, 366, 367, 372, 373, 381, 
425, 426, 427, 496, 502, 51 0, 564, 593, 611, 
612, 617, 618, 621, 622, 624, 625, 626, 627, 
628, 629, 630, 636, 644, 645, 647, 651, 663, 
665, 669  
Rail buses  ................................ .....................  663 
Rail cars  ................................ .......................  663 
Rail Sanraksha  ................................ ...............  37 
Railnet  .............  99, 404, 406, 408, 409, 687, 690  
Rail-road ................................ ......................  239 
Rails  ................................ .....................  187, 665  
Railtel  ... 320, 395, 396,  397, 612, 618, 629, 637, 
650 
Railway  .. xxx, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 27, 28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 
43, 45, 48, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 
65, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 
82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 93, 9 4, 95, 96, 97, 
99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 
118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 147, 149, 
150, 151, 152, 15 3, 154, 156, 157, 159, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 
171, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 182, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 
194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 210, 212, 213, 
214, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 
227, 228, 230, 231, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 
240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 250, 
254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 263, 
264, 265, 267, 268, 269, 270, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 277, 278, 279, 281, 282, 283,  284, 285, 
286, 287, 289, 292, 295, 297, 298, 299, 300, 
301, 302, 303, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 314, 
316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 
325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 333, 342, 
344, 353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361, 
365, 366, 367, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 375, 
INDEX  
 
754 
For internal use of IA&AD  376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 
386, 387, 388, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 398, 
400, 401, 402, 404, 406, 408, 409, 411, 413, 
415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 421, 422, 424, 425, 
426, 427, 429, 434, 435, 436, 439, 442, 446, 
447, 4 48, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 457, 
464, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 474, 475, 
477, 483, 484, 485, 487, 488, 495, 496, 498, 
499, 500, 501, 502, 504, 508, 509, 511, 512, 
514, 516, 518, 520, 521, 524, 525, 527, 528, 
529, 530, 533, 535, 541, 542, 543, 54 8, 549, 
550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 558, 
559, 560, 561, 562, 563, 566, 567, 568, 569, 
570, 571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 
579, 580, 581, 583, 584, 585, 589, 593, 594, 
598, 599, 602, 605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 611, 
612, 616, 617, 618, 619 , 622, 623, 624, 625, 
626, 627, 628, 629, 633, 635, 636, 637, 638, 
639, 640, 643, 645, 646, 647, 648, 658, 659, 
660, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 666, 667, 669, 
671, 672, 673, 678, 681, 682, 687, 689, 690  
Railway Board  . 3, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 
18, 1 9, 23, 24, 32, 33, 41, 43, 45, 48, 60, 76, 
77, 79, 83, 93, 94, 96, 99, 100, 102, 104, 
105, 106, 107, 118, 120, 124, 128, 131, 133, 
134, 137, 149, 150, 151, 156, 157, 159, 161, 
165, 167, 171, 173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 185, 188, 195, 196, 198, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 220, 222, 223, 224, 231, 236, 239, 241, 
242, 244, 246, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 
260, 263, 267, 268, 269, 270, 275, 277, 278, 
281, 283, 284, 285, 295, 297, 299, 300, 301, 
302, 303, 309, 310, 321, 326, 327, 330, 333, 
353, 355, 357, 358, 3 59, 361, 366, 370, 372, 
373, 375, 376, 378, 381, 386, 387, 388, 394, 
395, 396, 400, 406, 422, 424, 425, 429, 434, 
435, 436, 446, 450, 451, 454, 457, 467, 468, 
469, 474, 483, 498, 499, 509, 521, 524, 525, 
529, 541, 542, 548, 549, 550, 553, 554, 556, 
557, 55 9, 560, 561, 562, 567, 574, 576, 577, 
578, 579, 583, 584, 593, 598, 599, 602, 605, 
606, 607, 608, 618, 622, 658, 663, 666, 669, 
671, 672, 673, 682, 687, 694, 695, 702, 704, 
706 
Railways  xxix, xxx, 3, 16, 17, 20, 32, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 58, 63, 66, 74, 77, 79, 82, 84, 86, 88, 89, 
93, 94, 100, 101, 102, 104, 106, 107, 118, 
124, 128, 131, 132, 149, 150, 151, 156, 157, 
160, 164, 165, 166, 173, 175, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 197, 199, 200, 206, 218, 225, 228, 237, 239, 242, 244, 
246, 248, 250 , 255, 256, 260, 261, 264, 267, 
268, 273, 275, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 
285, 286, 295, 297, 299, 300, 301, 302, 304, 
307, 309, 310, 316, 318, 320, 322, 324, 325, 
326, 327, 329, 330, 333, 341, 343, 344, 347, 
356, 361, 364, 366, 370, 371, 372, 373, 375,  
376, 377, 381, 382, 386, 393, 400, 403, 404, 
407, 408, 409, 417, 421, 422, 426, 427, 430, 
434, 435, 436, 437, 440, 446, 450, 452, 458, 
460, 461, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 477, 479, 
480, 482, 483, 486, 487, 492, 501, 502, 504, 
505, 506, 513, 514, 515, 516, 518, 519, 521, 
524, 529, 530, 532, 540, 549, 551, 552, 553, 
556, 561, 566, 567, 568, 569, 574, 577, 578, 
583, 584, 585, 593, 599, 605, 606, 608, 616, 
617, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 624, 625, 
626, 627, 646, 647, 658, 659, 662, 663, 664, 
665, 666, 667, 6 68, 669, 670, 671, 675, 676, 
677, 680, 687, 690  
Rajbhasha  ................................ . 18, 19, 179, 551  
Rajdhani  ........................ 268, 271, 325, 346, 665  
Rake  ..... 244, 246, 247, 261, 263, 293, 297, 300, 
307, 308, 310, 315, 318, 319, 320, 322, 338, 
342, 355, 356, 359, 363, 364, 366, 367, 455, 
456 
Rakes  .... 259, 260, 297, 305, 308, 310, 315, 316, 
322, 326, 338, 341, 344, 364  
RAM  .............  xxx, 1, 2, 290, 577, 579, 693, 694  
Rashtriya  ................................ ........................  37 
Rate .... 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 57, 
60, 61, 62, 67, 72, 75, 110, 111, 114, 115, 
116, 129, 131, 132, 136, 142, 159, 181, 219, 
225, 236, 239, 242, 254, 255, 257, 258, 260, 
270, 271, 287, 381, 405, 407, 438, 441, 443, 
446, 471, 472, 473, 474, 476, 478, 479, 499, 
508, 509, 510, 523, 528, 529, 532, 533, 537, 
539, 595, 672  
Rate Circulars  ................................  75, 254, 271  
Rates  ....... 71, 171, 236, 239, 257, 326,  508, 591  
rating  .... 236, 240, 438, 515, 516, 517, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 
644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
ratio . 90, 312, 480, 518, 620, 622, 623, 624, 628  
Ration  ..............  46, 493, 509, 570, 577, 578, 580  
Rationalisation  .............................  243, 259, 322  
Rationalization  ..... 259, 301, 308, 332, 339, 340, 
427 
Rationalized  ................................ ...........  72, 259  
 
 
755 
For internal use of IA&AD  RB .. 22, 23, 95, 96, 99, 100, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 117, 119, 120, 122, 
124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 151, 155, 171, 173, 175, 177 , 225, 
295, 297, 320, 366, 399, 400, 401, 500, 501, 
508, 509, 569, 578, 690, See Railway Board  
RBI ....... 326, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 
640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 
649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
RBS  ................................ ..................  71, 72, 247  
RCF  ...... 320, 326, 366, 427, 466 , 472, 496, 515, 
611 
RCIL  ................................ ............  611, 618, 637  
RCT ................................ ......... 79, 281, 282, 283  
RDSO  ..... 79, 297, 320, 321, 353, 354, 366, 381, 
395, 396, 425, 428, 430, 436, 464, 514, 515, 
516, 517, 519, 523, 554, 561, 564, 658, 659, 
660, 661, 662, 663, 664, 666, 667, 670, 671, 
672, 673, 675, 677, 680, 682  
RE .........................  177, 370, 371, 372, 396, 401  
Real-time ................................ ......................  314 
Rebooking  ................................ ....................  291 
Receipt 51, 59, 60, 62, 64, 86, 88, 104, 112, 120, 
141, 142, 157, 159, 162, 164, 185, 187, 188, 
194, 210, 228, 232, 244, 247, 256, 258, 264, 
267, 275, 277, 278, 288, 292, 343, 367, 3 75, 
376, 413, 434, 436, 440, 461, 463, 473, 474, 
475, 486, 487, 494, 500, 503, 506, 507, 508, 
509, 510, 511, 525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530, 
535, 536, 539, 540, 542, 544, 546, 550, 580, 
581, 588, 598, 609, 672, 688, 689  
Receipt Transmit Note  ................................ . 474 
Receipts  ...... 37, 38, 65, 70, 71, 76, 84, 110, 131, 
138, 140, 215, 235, 245, 248, 255, 256, 258, 
270, 288, 289, 351, 413, 433, 462, 486, 487, 
489, 490, 493, 511, 512, 529, 530, 532, 533, 
534, 537, 542, 543, 546, 575, 586, 588, 594, 
683, 684, 688, 689  
Receipts & Payments  ...........................  586, 588  
Reclamation  ................................ .................  528 
Recognized ...... 89, 122, 130, 587, 588, 597, 605  
Recommendations  ...... 21, 32, 37, 108, 160, 164, 
180, 200, 298, 312, 324, 395, 396, 411, 426, 
430, 483, 548, 551, 552, 553, 554, 558, 561, 
589, 590  
Reconciliation  .... 54, 62, 65, 66, 67, 68, 75, 138,  
139, 142, 146, 228, 229, 444, 473, 479, 482, 
488, 494, 531, 533, 534, 536, 571, 595, 609, 
633, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 645, 646, 
647, 648, 650  Reconditioning  ................................ .............  669 
Reconnaissance  ................................ ............  175 
Records  .... 25, 26, 27, 29, 93, 99, 153, 154, 155, 
162, 167, 168, 347, 5 58, 577, 681, 685, 689  
Recoupment  ................................ . 494, 522, 579  
recoverable  ....... 35, 88, 116, 192, 224, 470, 478, 
588, 597  
Recoverable  ................................ .................  280 
Recoveries  83, 90, 109, 116, 117, 118, 133, 142, 
209, 210, 216, 227, 276, 279, 280, 378, 449, 
452, 469, 471, 483, 488, 490, 536, 572, 602  
Recovery  .. 49, 50, 126, 137, 138, 139, 143, 144, 
145, 168, 209, 211, 213, 286, 293, 313, 337, 
355, 361, 459, 460, 492, 675, 676, 677, 680, 
682 
Recruitment  ...... 24, 30, 93, 94, 95, 97, 101, 102, 
103, 104, 119, 137, 139, 141, 142, 147, 155, 
177, 396, 401, 488, 567,  569, 575, 583, 673, 
682 
Redevelopment  ................................ ............  593 
Redressal  .................  96, 134, 244, 284, 325, 667  
Re-engagement  ................. 94, 95, 105, 138, 140  
References  .. 19, 22, 28, 284, 297, 301, 324, 325, 
327, 328, 332, 333, 395, 529, 672  
Refresher  ...............  143, 302, 334, 347, 554, 558  
Refrigerated  ................................ .........  243, 425 
Refund  ...... 62, 75, 236, 239, 240, 258, 265, 266, 
276, 277, 282, 290, 293, 503  
Refunds  .. 75, 236, 242, 267, 268, 269, 277, 288, 
289, 290  
Regional  ...............................  583, 585, 589, 628  
REGIS  ................................ ......................  50, 98  
Register  .... 24, 25, 26, 27, 41, 42, 44, 48, 52, 53, 
55, 56, 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 99, 105, 109, 121, 122, 123, 138, 
139, 140, 141, 142, 146, 153, 158, 159, 161, 
162, 167, 182, 183, 185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 
191, 193, 199, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 227, 228, 229, 230, 247, 256, 
257, 258, 262, 266 , 271, 287, 288, 289, 290, 
291, 292, 293, 305, 307, 343, 345, 346, 347, 
349, 375, 400, 405, 410, 419, 435, 437, 440, 
442, 444, 445, 446, 450, 453, 458, 460, 462, 
468, 469, 470, 474, 475, 480, 481, 482, 485, 
486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 
495, 500, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 525, 526, 
528, 530, 531, 532, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 
545, 546, 571, 572, 573, 577, 580, 581, 589, 
596, 597, 598, 602, 609, 633, 675, 676, 677, 
678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 683, 684, 685, 689  
INDEX  
 
756 
For internal use of IA&AD  Registers  .. 25, 26, 27, 54, 55, 56, 69 , 86, 87, 88, 
119, 142, 159, 197, 199, 209, 210, 212, 213, 
215, 216, 229, 230, 341, 345, 364, 448, 470, 
489, 493, 529, 535, 536, 571, 580, 581, 682  
Registration  .... 99, 156, 168, 221, 225, 244, 247, 
257, 258, 265, 266, 278, 288, 305, 309, 404, 
506, 508, 516, 5 17, 569, 571, 572, 583, 688  
Regular  ... 96, 145, 154, 162, 166, 181, 298, 397, 
557, 672  
Regularity  ................................ ....................  598 
regulations  ................................ ......................  14 
Regulations  ...... 14, 38, 45, 93, 94, 96, 118, 124, 
216, 233, 254, 256, 259, 274, 305, 308, 328, 
357, 389, 471, 484, 548, 553, 573, 583, 588, 
590, 5 95, 601, 602, 603, 608, 659, 694  
Rehabilitation  176, 196, 408, 428, 432, 464, 668  
Reimbursement  .... 25, 26, 27, 81, 111, 112, 133, 
150, 151, 152, 158, 275, 511, 529  
Re-imbursements  ................................ .........  685 
Rejected  221, 230, 460, 506, 508, 525, 545, 660  
Rejection  ...............  376, 461, 487, 52 5, 683, 684  
Relations  ................................ ................  94, 237  
Relay  .............................  347, 386, 401, 403, 564  
RELHS  ................................ .........  151, 153, 171  
Reliance  ................................ .......................  395 
Relief ...... 45, 149, 151, 154, 164, 168, 170, 185, 
281, 298, 299, 306, 323, 328, 329, 330, 341, 
365, 408, 409, 426, 428, 431, 432, 499, 559, 
560, 562, 563, 564  
Relinqui shed ................................ ................  198 
Relisted  ................................ ................  676, 677  
REMCL  ................................ ........  612, 623, 643  
Remedial  .. 57, 68, 237, 258, 304, 375, 444, 473, 
557, 590, 664  
Remission  ...... 75, 247, 262, 265, 276, 287, 291, 
292, 541  
Remittance  ..... 10, 74, 83, 85, 88, 142, 210, 216, 
235, 239, 240, 264, 265, 266, 280, 286, 287, 
292, 541 
Remittances  ................................ ............  84, 270  
Remuneration  ........  106, 109, 138, 140, 160, 161  
Renewal  ..... 37, 77, 81, 152, 173, 174, 176, 181, 
185, 186, 193, 194, 196, 241, 389, 400, 411, 
564 
Rent  41, 43, 48, 49, 51, 110, 111, 118, 132, 133, 
137, 139, 141, 168, 194, 195, 196, 209, 210, 
213, 277, 287, 293, 313, 346, 347, 471, 478, 
488, 525, 531, 541, 545, 546, 597, 598, 601, 
684 Repairs 56, 79, 80, 190, 195, 196, 198, 199, 214, 
223, 292, 313, 347, 373, 376, 391, 400, 412, 
421, 425, 426, 429, 430, 431, 432, 434, 437, 
449, 451, 452, 453, 45 5, 458, 459, 460, 579, 
580, 581, 677, 681  
Replacement  . 37, 56, 77, 81, 157, 158, 162, 188, 
195, 200, 214, 338, 405, 437, 451, 468, 478, 
551, 552, 619, 681  
Report  21, 30, 83, 108, 119, 123, 138, 139, 141, 
144, 145, 146, 181, 182, 186, 187, 199, 203, 
269, 317 , 346, 413, 434, 437, 455, 456, 484, 
486, 487, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495, 503, 
507, 509, 510, 511, 532, 552, 557, 558, 581, 
585, 589, 606, 607, 633, 675, 676, 677, 678, 
679, 680, 681, 684, 685, 687, 689, 690, 691, 
692 
Reports  ..... 16, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24, 25,  26, 27, 28, 
41, 42, 53, 55, 63, 64, 83, 97, 98, 108, 133, 
139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 157, 165, 
167, 179, 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 187, 188, 
191, 194, 204, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 
215, 216, 218, 228, 229, 230, 236,237, 245, 
246, 247, 249, 250 , 253, 254, 263, 269, 273, 
274, 275, 287, 290, 292, 293, 298, 305, 309, 
315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 322, 324, 343, 
347, 353, 360, 363, 364, 373, 374, 375, 391, 
396, 397, 403, 407, 410, 425, 427, 433, 437, 
438, 455, 456, 457, 458, 462, 463, 469, 483, 
489, 490, 502, 503, 506, 507, 508, 511, 539, 
540, 545, 551, 552, 553, 561, 562, 569, 581, 
607, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 
641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 
650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 675, 676, 678, 679, 
681, 682, 689, 690, 692  
Repository  ................................ ............  254, 692  
Republic  ................................ ....... 138, 140, 495  
Requisition  .... 440, 475, 491, 507, 508, 510, 531  
Requisitions  .................. 404, 508, 509, 510, 682  
Rescue  ...................  151, 428, 560, 569, 573, 574  
Research  . 78, 100, 107, 366, 464, 523, 563, 564, 
629, 658, 659, 663, 664, 665, 669, 670, 672, 
675, 676, 67 7, 678, 679, 680  
Research Designs and Standards Organization
 ................................ ................................ . 658 
Reservation  ...... xxx, 70, 71, 137, 139, 147, 238, 
240, 241, 244, 245, 250, 269, 273, 277, 289, 
337, 404, 617  
Reserve ... 36, 37, 69, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88, 186, 
193, 200, 203, 412, 435, 445, 467, 512 , 608  
 
 
757 
For internal use of IA&AD  Residential  ... 112, 121, 123, 131, 165, 176, 195, 
373, 378, 682  
Residual  ................................ .................  76, 406  
resources  .................  36, 320, 321, 422, 502, 659  
Resources  ... 32, 33, 77, 205, 207, 249, 312, 314, 
318, 403, 408, 484, 502, 608, 618, 619  
RESS  ................................ ........................  97, 99  
Rest .. 16, 18, 23, 25, 27, 47, 113, 12 4, 214, 248, 
293, 341, 357, 358, 366, 375, 381, 495, 687  
Result  ..... 23, 143, 156, 178, 246, 374, 401, 501, 
570, 594, 660  
Retired  47, 95, 99, 105, 106, 129, 133, 136, 138, 
140, 151, 153, 161, 596, 672  
Retirement  .. 37, 51, 52, 81, 93, 96, 97, 100, 106, 
110, 114, 1 16, 117, 121, 122, 127, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 144, 146, 281, 567, 595, 597, 672  
Retiring  ...........  96, 135, 237, 243, 283, 286, 289  
Returned  ................................ 441, 476, 527, 528  
Returned Stores  ................................ .... 476, 683  
Returns  ....... 20, 74, 76, 142, 198, 205, 209, 210, 
211, 213, 215, 219, 261, 262, 263, 265 , 266, 
268, 272, 287, 292, 344, 487, 569, 599, 607  
Revenue  ... 36, 37, 54, 69, 76, 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 
86, 87, 88, 89, 176, 191, 195, 197, 206, 232, 
239, 297, 315, 328, 343, 375, 397, 399, 400, 
410, 411, 412, 428, 430, 431, 437, 445, 448, 
449, 458, 467, 512, 5 13, 530, 587, 591, 599, 
633, 645, 646, 647, 650  
Revenue Allocation Registers  ......................  229 
Revenues  ................................ ...... 32, 37, 81, 82  
Reverse  .........  156, 187, 225, 314, 320, 502, 506  
Revised  .... 60, 87, 177, 201, 218, 219, 328, 401, 
470, 511, 512, 659  
Revised Estimate  ..........................  218, 219, 328  
Revision  ... 1, 72, 73, 97, 98, 162, 168, 219, 243, 
258, 270, 288, 293, 301, 302, 334, 341, 377, 
438, 558, 664, 666, 668, 672, 682, 693  
Rewards  ................................ 493, 587, 682, 685  
RFID  ................................ ............................  314 
RFP ................................ ..............................  600 
Right  .............  184, 284, 298, 323, 341, 367, 564  
Risk ...... xxx, 23, 40, 45, 58, 70, 72, 75, 97, 155, 
178, 1 87, 204, 245, 311, 312, 362, 373, 374, 
401, 402, 433, 475, 484, 485, 487, 501, 545, 
546, 559, 570, 587, 594, 606, 659, 661, 683  
Risks  ................................ ............................  587 
RITES  .. 268, 372, 509, 510, 511, 517, 524, 611, 
612, 617, 623, 634  
RLDA  ...........  593, 594, 598, 599, 600, 602, 622  
RMS  ..............  244, 246, 314, 315, 316, 342, 366  RMSP  ................................ ...........  297, 323, 366  
Road  ........  78, 202, 316, 345, 367, 564, 628, 668  
ROB  .. 78, 82, 175, 177, 196, 341, 367, 552, 564  
ROH  ................................ .....................  322, 432  
Roles  .. 18, 38, 94, 150, 174, 238, 296, 388, 424, 
499, 550, 567, 605  
Roll 42, 44, 48, 49, 66, 136, 290, 346, 442,  470, 
471, 474, 475, 487, 489, 490, 491, 621, 622, 
623 
Rolling  . 17, 77, 78, 80, 157, 200, 301, 312, 313, 
314, 320, 339, 341, 367, 369, 371, 382, 383, 
384, 412, 421, 422, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 
429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 
438, 439, 440, 44 1, 442, 444, 445, 446, 447, 
448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 455,458, 459, 
460, 464, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 
474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 
483, 485, 498, 513, 550, 559, 562, 580, 638, 
658, 662, 663, 665  
Rolling stock  .. 77, 205, 218, 24 0, 246, 260, 261, 
295, 297, 301, 303, 312, 315, 322, 324, 328, 
332, 341, 353, 369, 412, 421, 424, 428, 439, 
444, 445, 446, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 459, 
467, 468, 469, 470, 477, 479, 480, 482, 483, 
485, 486, 498, 499, 522, 524, 529, 531, 550, 
580, 584, 617 , 629, 638, 658, 661, 662, 663, 
664, 665, 669  
Rolling stocks  ................................ ...... 369, 665  
roll-out ................................ .........................  708 
Roof -top ................................ .......................  550 
Roster  ............  156, 298, 313, 491, 581, 683, 684  
Rosters  ................................ .........  137, 139, 560  
Route  48, 72, 122, 186, 187, 254, 259, 268, 271, 
319, 341, 356, 357, 359, 363, 364, 373, 386, 
397, 401, 456, 459, 460, 564, 625  
Routes  ..... 72, 258, 259, 340, 341, 357, 386, 665  
Routine  ................................ .........................  431 
RPF .... 46, 93, 94, 128, 194, 273, 566, 567, 570, 
571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 580, 
581, 685  
RPSF  ................................ ............  128, 566, 567  
RR ...........  72, 244, 247, 248, 259, 263, 315, 367  
RRB  ............  28, 30, 79, 101, 102, 139, 147, 682  
RRC  ................................ ... 28, 30, 94, 101, 139  
RRs ............................... 244, 259, 260, 263, 316  
RRSK  ................................ . 37, 77, 79, 200, 228  
RSF ................................ ..........................  77, 78  
RSPB  ................................ .... 104, 605, 606, 609  
RTC  ....... 249, 250, 251, 298, 322, 324, 331, 367  
RTGS  ................................ ...........  475, 496, 511  
INDEX  
 
758 
For internal use of IA&AD  RTI ....... 241, 244, 254, 284, 327, 330, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 335, 336, 344, 367, 396, 458, 551, 
552, 553, 554, 564  
RTSAs  ................................ ..........................  241 
RUB  .. 78, 82, 175, 177, 196, 341, 367, 552, 564  
Rule  ...... 109, 111, 122, 134, 135, 136, 137, 257, 
282, 347, 557, 558, 563, 602  
Rules  .. 2, 4, 5, 11, 14, 18, 20, 30, 37, 38, 41, 55, 
57, 66, 69, 72,  73, 74, 86, 93, 94, 108, 109, 
115, 116, 118, 120, 122, 126, 127, 131, 133, 
134, 135, 136, 137, 150, 154, 157, 169, 174, 
188, 199, 200, 203, 209, 216, 230, 231, 233, 
239, 241, 242, 247, 248, 253,254, 255, 256, 
259, 260, 261, 264, 267, 268, 270, 274, 277, 
281, 298, 300, 302, 306, 317, 320, 327, 330, 
331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 338, 344, 354, 
358, 365, 366, 367, 381, 388, 389, 390, 398, 
399, 411, 426, 443, 445, 448, 449, 454, 471, 
480, 481, 484, 511, 520, 526, 533, 548, 550, 
551, 553, 556, 560, 567, 568, 56 9, 574, 575, 
576, 583, 584, 589, 590, 593, 602, 603, 613, 
633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 
642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 
651, 652, 653, 654, 659  
Run . 32, 273, 300, 301, 303, 315, 329, 332, 338, 
351, 357, 363, 409, 471, 550  
Running  .. 17, 45, 61, 93, 94, 113, 114, 124, 193, 
199, 202, 224, 240, 241, 247, 274, 295, 298, 
299, 304, 305, 306, 309, 310, 311, 312, 315, 
316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 324, 325, 326, 327, 
329, 330, 337, 338, 341, 342, 344, 345, 351, 
359, 363, 375, 376, 380, 404, 409, 416, 425, 
434, 448, 452, 456, 457, 459, 483, 524, 525, 
543, 550, 553, 555, 559, 625, 668, 671, 688  
RVNL  .... 77, 372, 396, 618, 625, 636, 638, 645, 
646, 647, 651  
RWF  ................................ ......427, 472, 496, 510  
S 
S&T .. 2, 302, 333, 354, 367, 386, 388, 395, 396, 
398, 399, 401, 403, 404, 40 6, 410, 411, 418, 
427, 549, 552, 625, 629, 661, 671, 675  
Safe 82, 149, 166, 288, 289, 291, 298, 299, 389, 
398, 453, 548, 552, 553, 555, 578  
Safeguard  ................................ .............  201, 566  
Safety 2, 9, 17, 18, 19, 21, 25, 26, 46, 54, 77, 78, 
84, 105, 106, 127, 151, 163, 170, 194, 199, 
201, 208, 295, 298, 300, 301, 302, 307, 312, 
313, 314, 324, 326, 327, 330, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 341, 345, 347, 348, 353, 357, 358, 365, 376, 381, 386, 391, 395, 396, 398, 399, 401, 
402, 411, 412, 415, 417, 421, 424, 425, 426, 
428, 430, 453, 464, 469, 509, 5 22, 548, 549, 
550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 558, 
559, 560, 561, 562, 563, 567, 578, 619, 622, 
658, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 667, 670, 671, 
698 
Salary  ... 25, 26, 27, 47, 80, 94, 95, 99, 108, 109, 
137, 139, 141, 142, 144, 145, 146, 168, 211, 
215, 216,  346, 484, 545, 673, 675, 676, 677, 
678, 679, 680, 682, 684, 685  
Sale ...... 141, 142, 156, 187, 209, 214, 215, 240, 
293, 425, 452, 487, 489, 502, 506, 507, 508, 
510, 540, 541, 546  
Sales  ..... 210, 240, 265, 292, 461, 478, 495, 507, 
523, 530, 535, 536, 538, 540, 541, 5 98 
Sales Abstracts  ................................ .............  535 
Saloon  ................................ ..........................  436 
Saloons  .......................... 325, 432, 449, 468, 469  
SAMPRATI  .............................  3, 695, 696, 697  
Sanction  109, 151, 158, 175, 179, 181, 199, 219, 
227, 256, 287, 292, 399, 400, 425, 660, 682, 
683 
Sanctioned  24, 25, 26, 27, 41, 42, 44, 46, 50, 53, 
55, 56, 58, 63,  64, 69, 76, 77, 89, 90, 98, 
101, 108, 109, 110, 111, 116, 121, 129, 130, 
134, 138, 140, 141, 142, 152, 157, 169, 174, 
175, 176, 179, 180, 181, 185, 186, 188, 190, 
196, 200, 201, 202, 203, 206, 218, 219, 220, 
226, 227, 229, 283, 343, 358, 374, 379, 381, 
389, 399, 411, 435, 436, 437, 445, 453, 467, 
468, 469, 471, 472, 481, 487, 488, 489, 491, 
493, 494, 526, 529, 535, 578, 579, 580, 606, 
627, 660, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 682, 
683, 684, 691  
Sanctions  .. 10, 11, 12, 13, 24, 25, 26, 27, 43, 53, 
95, 109, 118, 131, 137, 139, 151, 157, 158, 
175, 178, 188, 189, 208, 209, 210, 214, 233, 
241, 242, 255, 256, 269, 283, 292, 301, 374, 
380, 400, 410, 411, 430, 431, 432, 434, 435, 
468, 485, 487, 490, 492, 601, 602, 685, 700  
Sanitation  ...... 149, 154, 158, 166, 168, 478, 490  
SATSaNG  ................................ .... 314, 320, 321  
SBI ................................ ...............  251, 252, 511  
Scale  . 18, 41, 101, 131, 138, 140, 145, 164, 165, 
187, 270, 365, 396, 405, 429, 549, 573  
Scales  ................................ ...........................  451 
SCC  ................................ ......................  120, 241  
Schedule  . 58, 119, 120, 122, 123, 133, 156, 157, 
171, 174, 188, 199, 208, 209, 214, 215, 219, 
 
 
759 
For internal use of IA&AD  220, 221, 222 , 225, 256, 318, 337, 344, 355, 
356, 359, 363, 364, 376, 378, 380, 389, 390, 
397, 399, 402, 407, 435, 440, 455, 463, 489, 
506, 507, 527, 531, 539, 552, 600, 601, 602, 
613, 666, 671  
Schedules  ......................  318, 381, 413, 586, 594  
Scheme  ..... 49, 96, 106, 116, 117, 125, 137, 1 39, 
151, 170, 171, 257, 283, 427, 458, 472, 473, 
496 
Schools  ................  81, 93, 94, 106, 140, 142, 196  
Scientific  ................................ ...... 149, 484, 659  
Scope ...... 54, 156, 197, 203, 219, 227, 270, 392, 
406, 475, 523, 524, 575, 588, 595, 600, 689  
Scrap  .... 175, 187, 194, 212, 213, 320, 346, 405, 
429, 461, 486, 487, 490, 499, 501, 503, 506, 
513, 514, 519, 528, 531, 532, 538, 540, 541, 
544, 545, 546, 660, 672, 683, 684  
Scrapped  ................................ ......................  491 
Scrutinising  ................................ ....................  11 
Scrutiny  137, 139, 209, 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
216, 289, 299, 301, 304, 397, 486, 487, 489, 
490, 491, 492 , 493, 495  
SD ................................ ................  224, 225, 279  
SDGM  ................................ ......................  17, 30  
Search  ... 319, 363, 455, 503, 508, 509, 510, 689  
Season  ................................ ..................  249, 250  
Seasonal  ................................ .......................  308 
Secret  ..........................  20, 26, 28, 495, 511, 659  
Secret Fund  ................................ ....................  13 
Secretary  .. 17, 18, 102, 494, 498, 583, 605, 606, 
619, 620, 621, 623, 624, 673  
SECROADS ................................ .................  314 
Section ... 25, 27, 44, 45, 47, 52, 66, 67, 81, 119, 
123, 124, 163, 164, 165, 174, 182, 183, 184, 
186, 199, 200, 211, 242, 260, 261, 269, 281, 
282, 293, 303, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 315, 
320, 328, 331, 333, 336, 337, 342, 344, 345, 
351, 352, 353, 357, 359, 362, 363,364, 370, 
371, 372, 390, 391, 398, 405, 413, 424, 425, 
426, 435, 443, 449, 464, 468, 470, 472, 476, 
482, 493, 496, 509, 511, 546, 572, 575, 585, 
588, 593, 605, 613, 614, 615, 624, 625, 627, 
628, 629, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 
640, 641, 642, 64 3, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 
649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 656, 670, 671, 
672, 673, 689, 690, 691, 692  
Sectional  ................................ ...... 343, 391, 424  
Sector  ..... 17, 170, 204, 250, 484, 659, 662, 667, 
681 
Secunderabad  ................................ ...........  7, 583  Security  2, 9, 17, 58, 62, 81, 107, 208, 214, 223, 
224, 274,  278, 279, 360, 361, 365, 405, 424, 
466, 489, 490, 493, 506, 524, 525, 526, 536, 
545, 566, 567, 568, 569, 570, 571, 573, 574, 
575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 580, 584, 589, 600, 
601, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 
642, 643, 644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 
653, 654, 673, 685, 701  
Segment  ................................ .......................  591 
Segregation  ................................ ..........  155, 166  
Seized  ................................ ...........  569, 572, 573  
SEJ ................................ 183, 184, 185, 186, 194  
Selection ....................  18, 20, 102, 137, 142, 397  
Self-Propelled  ................................ ...... 562, 564  
Seminars .......................... 20, 107, 155, 408, 550  
Senior  . 17, 30, 90, 171, 174, 198, 209, 211, 236, 
237, 270, 302, 304, 367, 371, 392, 399, 424, 
448, 464, 479, 480, 496, 499, 539, 549, 605, 
620, 659  
Senior Divisional Engineers .........................  174 
Senior Materials Managers  ..........................  499 
Senior Section Engineers  .............................  174 
Separate  .................  197, 275, 319, 477, 585, 589  
Service  25, 26, 27, 42, 47, 50,  51, 52, 53, 55, 59, 
93, 94, 97, 98, 99, 101, 105, 108, 109, 110, 
111, 114, 116, 117, 118, 121, 122, 125, 126, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
139, 140, 141, 142, 155, 163, 176, 177, 194, 
202, 207, 211, 212, 213, 230, 231, 241, 243, 
248, 268, 271, 273, 274, 275, 278, 283, 285, 
287, 289, 295, 299, 312, 315, 316, 318, 320, 
337, 338, 348, 367, 369, 371, 373, 378, 397, 
401, 429, 434, 450, 455, 460, 477, 487, 488, 
489, 494, 495, 520, 523, 553, 570, 577, 583, 
585, 598, 600, 601, 602, 614, 617, 628, 6 58, 
663, 665, 666, 681, 682, 685, 687, 690  
Services  .... 79, 94, 100, 101, 120, 126, 135, 136, 
137, 147, 149, 156, 170, 187, 273, 324, 369, 
370, 372, 412, 464, 501, 502, 584, 612, 616, 
618, 621, 641, 692  
Settlement  ...... 98, 138, 140, 146, 240, 488, 495, 
496, 503, 60 6 
Shatabdi  ................................ ....... 268, 325, 665  
shed .. 73, 80, 238, 239, 242, 293, 307, 315, 344, 
347, 348, 349, 364, 376, 452  
Sheds  70, 80, 242, 304, 306, 329, 340, 375, 381, 
421, 425, 427, 428, 431, 439, 449, 453, 454, 
458, 477, 499, 543, 568  
Sheet  73, 88, 144, 146, 186, 265, 26 7, 470, 472, 
474, 475, 508, 539, 607, 682  
INDEX  
 
760 
For internal use of IA&AD  Sheets  ....... 19, 22, 63, 66, 69, 75, 211, 212, 226, 
256, 262, 291, 293, 343, 346, 407, 438, 442, 
446, 448, 461, 462, 469, 470, 471, 472, 474, 
479, 481, 486, 540, 545, 546, 602, 677  
Shivpuri  ................................ .612, 616, 627, 648  
Shop 47, 66 , 67, 68, 69, 214, 318, 319, 320, 340, 
359, 363, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 446, 450, 
460, 461, 468, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 
477, 479, 480, 485, 486, 531  
Shops  35, 69, 428, 442, 445, 452, 468, 469, 470, 
471, 475, 477, 478, 480, 486, 597  
Shunting  . 45, 29 9, 306, 307, 308, 313, 337, 340, 
341, 343, 344, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 
441, 461  
Sick ...... 154, 163, 167, 304, 307, 319, 345, 349, 
359, 363, 424, 427, 455, 459  
Siding  ..... 73, 184, 191, 262, 265, 288, 291, 317, 
458 
Sidings  ..... 35, 64, 70, 71, 73, 74, 175, 177, 191 , 
192, 193, 210, 229, 238, 240, 242, 248, 255, 
295, 298, 301, 307, 322, 348, 349, 373, 375  
Sign off  ................................ ........................  381 
Signal  ..... 80, 295, 299, 303, 335, 367, 386, 390, 
391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 
400, 403, 404, 412, 553, 563, 564, 578, 662, 
664, 675  
Signal & Telecommunication  ................  38, 392  
Signaling  ....... 314, 320, 337, 367, 389, 390, 391  
Signalling  ....... 78, 192, 205, 218, 312, 386, 388, 
389, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 
409, 412, 413, 629, 658, 662, 664, 671  
Signature  59, 118, 157, 188, 269, 274, 287, 347, 
435, 4 71, 506, 539, 602  
Signatures  59, 60, 118, 127, 157, 188, 231, 435, 
528, 579, 602  
SIMS  ................................ ............  554, 557, 561  
Simulation  ................................ ............  321, 661  
Single  ................................ ...........  220, 363, 520  
sinking  ................................ ............................  10 
Site ..........................  23, 186, 320, 406, 409, 585  
SLA  ................................ ......................  361, 367  
SLAM  ................................ ..................  314, 381  
Sleeper  ..................  183, 185, 186, 193, 564, 671  
Sleeper s ................................ .183, 665, 666, 671  
Slight  ................................ ............................  202 
slip................................ ........... 84, 337, 345, 475  
slots ................................ ..............  339, 340, 576  
SLR ...............................  245, 278, 337, 348, 367  
SLRD  ................................ ...................  245, 278  
SLRs  ................................ ..............  71, 237, 241  Smart  ................................ ..............................  21 
SMART  ................................ ................  321, 690  
Smart Card  ................................ ...................  272 
SMaRTER  ................................ ....................  321 
SMs ................................ ..............  238, 304, 311  
SMS  ................................ ..... 236, 434, 502, 691  
SMU  ................................ ................................ . 3 
SO ................................ ................................  511 
Societies  ......................  93, 94 , 96, 132, 133, 583  
Software  ......xxix, xxx, 23, 40, 74, 99, 108, 180, 
182, 183, 273, 314, 316, 317, 342, 357, 361, 
362, 381, 382, 398, 400, 402, 403, 406, 410, 
414, 433, 455, 456, 506, 511, 556, 584, 585, 
589, 594, 609, 661, 664, 668  
Soil ................................ ...............................  669 
SOP ................................ ......................  573, 602  
SOPE ST ....... 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 338  
SOR  ................................ ..............  151, 171, 175  
Source code  ................................ ..................  362 
South  ................................ ..................  7, 99, 372  
Southern  ................................ ...........  7, 466, 693  
SPAD  ................................ ...........  403, 553, 564  
Spares  ............  199, 376, 428, 499, 662, 663, 672  
SPARROW  ....................... 18, 30, 687, 690, 691  
SPART  ................................ .................  562, 564  
SPCB  ................................ ....................  454, 464  
Special  19, 22, 45 , 46, 54, 56, 62, 73, 75, 78, 84, 
95, 98, 107, 110, 113, 115, 118, 121, 126, 
132, 157, 176, 186, 188, 193, 199, 202, 205, 
212, 219, 223, 232, 236, 237, 238, 240, 241, 
242, 243, 245, 255, 256, 257, 261, 262, 265, 
266, 268, 269, 270, 274, 276, 283, 289, 290,  
291, 292, 303, 304, 305, 308, 310, 318, 325, 
326, 327, 329, 330, 332, 336, 349, 353, 390, 
391, 397, 399, 400, 425, 441, 452, 453, 458, 
459, 460, 467, 475, 476, 483, 485, 522, 527, 
530, 541, 542, 545, 552, 553, 566, 568, 571, 
581, 602, 617, 622, 625, 626, 628, 667, 668, 
681 
Specialist  ................................ ..............  160, 170  
Specialists  ................................ .... 102, 152, 160  
Specifications  ..... 24, 53, 57, 194, 218, 220, 221, 
273, 353, 427, 524, 544, 658, 661, 664, 665, 
666, 668, 669  
Speed  23, 97, 156, 178, 184, 186, 193, 194, 196, 
298, 301, 303, 312, 313, 315, 326, 3 28, 333, 
337, 338, 353, 354, 363, 364, 375, 402, 426, 
433, 502, 612, 624, 629, 644, 651, 661, 662, 
663, 667, 668  
 
 
761 
For internal use of IA&AD  SPO ................................ ......... 94, 133, 424, 464  
spoke  ................................ ............................  339 
Sports  .. 2, 95, 102, 104, 138, 140, 143, 270, 605  
Spouse  ................................ ............................  48 
SR . 105, 301, 302, 333, 334, 343, 348, 367, 397  
Sr. AF A ................................ ............  33, 39, 424  
Sr. DMOs  ................................ .....................  149 
SRSF  ................................ ..............  79, 552, 553  
SRWBIL  ................................ ...... 612, 623, 644  
SSE ...... 211, 212, 213, 214, 392, 399, 424, 464, 
470, 476, 496  
SSEs  ....... 47, 174, 214, 215, 371, 372, 388, 394, 
398, 424  
SSO ................................ ..............................  511 
Stabling  ................................ ...73, 317, 355, 356  
Staff .... 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 , 29, 
45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 66, 78, 79, 80, 81, 93, 94, 
96, 101, 102, 106, 109, 113, 114, 119, 122, 
124, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 142, 144, 145, 149, 151, 152, 154, 
155, 160, 162, 164, 167, 168,176, 178, 185, 
186, 193, 194, 195, 196,  198, 199, 209, 211, 
212, 213, 215, 236, 238, 248, 262, 265, 280, 
281, 285, 291, 293, 298, 302, 304, 305, 306, 
307, 308, 311, 313, 315, 322, 327, 329, 331, 
333, 334, 338, 340, 343, 344, 347, 349, 351, 
352, 354, 360, 361, 362, 363, 373, 378, 380, 
381, 389, 392, 396, 398, 399, 405, 411, 412, 
428, 429, 442, 462, 463, 469, 470, 471, 475, 
478, 486, 487, 488, 489, 491, 493, 494, 495, 
548, 549, 550, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 557, 
558, 559, 569, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 
581, 589, 593, 605, 619, 620, 634, 635, 6 36, 
637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 
646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 
655, 673, 681, 682, 683, 684, 685  
Stamp  . 25, 26, 28, 138, 140, 141, 142, 211, 212, 
230, 287, 292, 462, 488, 494  
Stamps  .............................  64, 487, 491, 492, 493  
Standard  . 67, 151, 170 , 216, 219, 271, 443, 464, 
520, 573, 574, 670, 691  
Standardization  .... 338, 658, 661, 662, 663, 664, 
665, 666, 667, 670  
Standards  ...... 100, 118, 157, 160, 163, 188, 196, 
216, 219, 233, 354, 366, 374, 395, 402, 435, 
436, 523, 564, 575, 576, 585, 588, 591, 595, 
602, 603, 608, 613, 614, 615, 625, 628, 658, 
664, 666, 668  Standing 246, 327, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 343, 346, 347, 357, 358, 365, 502, 550, 
580, 608  
State  ... 25, 27, 54, 134, 149, 165, 186, 195, 198, 
232, 285, 326, 373, 436, 464, 502, 566, 567, 
568, 5 69, 573, 574, 575, 576, 598, 608, 619, 
620, 621, 625, 627, 628, 656  
State -of-the-art .............................  662, 665, 667  
Station  ...... 46, 88, 103, 176, 184, 186, 194, 238, 
241, 244, 245, 255, 257, 263, 264, 265, 266, 
267, 273, 276, 280, 285, 286, 306, 308, 316, 
317, 318, 320, 344, 3 46, 348, 351, 360, 367, 
391, 551, 573  
Station Accounts  ................................ ..........  263 
Station Earnings  ................................ ... 264, 276  
Stationary  ..... 113, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 
492, 493, 494, 545  
stations  ..... 5, 13, 35, 36, 54, 70, 71, 74, 81, 149, 
151, 154, 164, 165, 166, 194, 196, 204, 236, 
237, 238, 23 9, 240, 241, 245, 248, 250, 255, 
257, 259, 262, 263, 264, 265, 267, 271, 272, 
273, 274, 278, 281, 285, 286, 289, 293, 295, 
304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 316, 320, 329, 337, 
339, 340, 342, 344, 349, 352, 353, 356, 359, 
369, 379, 392, 409, 414, 416, 417, 418, 562 , 
566, 567, 573, 574, 617, 623, 626, 650  
Station -to-station  ................................ ..........  257 
Statistics  .. 33, 186, 310, 311, 352, 449, 507, 556  
Statutory  ... 72, 83, 124, 151, 225, 315, 398, 454, 
490, 527, 593, 598, 614, 622, 656, 661  
STBS  ................................ ....................  249, 250  
STD  ................................ ......................  165, 171  
Steel  ..... 182, 297, 323, 348, 366 , 499, 584, 623, 
668 
Steering  ................................ .......................  421 
Stipend  ................................ ...................  43, 107  
Stipendiary  ................................ .....................  43 
Stock  .... 25, 26, 28, 60, 77, 78, 80, 82, 122, 138, 
140, 157, 159, 162, 175, 187, 200, 210, 211, 
212, 213, 214, 215, 271, 288, 289, 290, 291, 
298, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 
313, 314 , 315, 318, 319, 320, 325, 329, 339, 
341, 342, 343, 345, 348, 349, 351, 363, 367, 
369, 371, 378, 389, 395, 397, 405, 418, 421, 
422, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 
432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 
441, 442, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448, 449,  450, 
451, 452, 453, 455, 456, 458, 459, 460, 461, 
462, 464, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 
474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 
INDEX  
 
762 
For internal use of IA&AD  483, 485, 487, 489, 490, 491, 493, 498, 499, 
500, 504, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 513, 514, 
519, 520, 522, 524, 533, 538, 539, 540, 541, 
544, 545, 546, 559, 562, 580, 581, 603, 608, 
633, 661, 662, 667, 669, 672, 677, 678, 682, 
683 
Stocking  ................  238, 498, 499, 500, 501, 672  
Stolen  ................................ ...........  569, 572, 574  
Store  ..... 182, 185, 298, 313, 440, 441, 476, 485, 
489, 490, 491, 492, 501, 510, 533, 53 9, 545, 
546, 660  
Store in Transit  ................................ ..... 507, 508  
Stores  . 16, 17, 25, 27, 28, 33, 39, 40, 56, 58, 60, 
61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 78, 82, 86, 119, 
141, 159, 162, 168, 169, 185, 187, 203, 209, 
211, 212, 213, 215, 216, 223, 224, 229, 232, 
236, 255, 292, 297, 301, 32 3, 333, 343, 346, 
373, 378, 389, 405, 411, 419, 424, 427, 429, 
430, 431, 432, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 
446, 447, 451, 452, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 
463, 466, 468, 469, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 
480, 481, 483, 484, 486, 487, 488, 490, 491, 
492, 493, 498 , 499, 500, 501, 502, 503, 504, 
506, 507, 511, 512, 514, 518, 519, 520, 521, 
522, 525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530, 531, 532, 
533, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 
542, 544, 545, 546, 556, 560, 567, 568, 571, 
580, 608, 621, 672, 681, 682, 683, 684  
Strat egic .... 13, 84, 206, 207, 246, 418, 456, 624  
Strategy  ................................ ........................  501 
Strength  .. 24, 25, 26, 27, 41, 100, 101, 108, 141, 
142, 160, 169, 186, 212, 248, 318, 343, 392, 
472, 487, 489, 491, 492, 567, 578, 665, 668, 
675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 682, 683, 684  
Structural  ................................ ..............  197, 66 8 
Structures  ...... 174, 197, 227, 389, 454, 595, 668  
Sub heads  ................................ .......................  36 
Sub Major  ................................ ................  36, 77  
Sub-assemblies ...... 427, 428, 661, 662, 665, 667  
Subdivision  ................................ ..................  448 
Subjects  ................................ ........................  300 
subordinate  ..... 5, 13, 59, 61, 211, 212, 256, 340, 
382, 383, 384, 422, 494, 539  
Subscribe  ................................ ......................  116 
Subscription  .............................  49, 50, 116, 602  
Subsidiary  .... 54, 56, 65, 67, 82, 85, 86, 89, 229, 
300, 327, 398, 443, 469, 482, 538, 551, 619, 
620, 621, 622, 627, 628, 629, 634, 635, 636, 
637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 650, 672  
Subsidy  ................................ ........  111, 112, 113  Subsistence Allowance  ...... 25, 26, 27, 137, 139  
Subst antive  ................................ ...................  587 
Sub-Stations  ................................ .................  665 
Substitutes  ...... 95, 101, 104, 105, 124, 214, 215, 
488, 494  
Suburban  ................................ ...... 269, 301, 324  
Subversive  ................................ ....................  569 
Summaries  . 65, 66, 68, 444, 475, 476, 530, 531, 
534, 538, 571  
Summary  ....................... 249, 250, 251, 252, 253  
Suo-Moto  ................................ .....................  551 
Superannuation  ............... 96, 135, 138, 140, 681  
Superintendence  ...................  18, 19, 21, 79, 412  
supernumerary  ................................ .............  100 
Supervisor  ................................ .... 238, 269, 360  
Supervisors ... 304, 357, 380, 398, 438, 472, 485, 
550, 554  
Supplement  ...............  17, 60, 145, 566, 614, 619  
Supplementary  .......................  76, 145, 179, 614  
Supplementary Demands  .............................  179 
Suppliers  ...... 119, 3 77, 440, 478, 522, 523, 524, 
525, 527, 529, 544, 667  
Supply  ...... 24, 56, 58, 60, 61, 64, 153, 159, 160, 
166, 199, 202, 213, 222, 223, 224, 227, 236, 
241, 257, 258, 293, 303, 305, 306, 307, 312, 
313, 347, 349, 355, 356, 361, 369, 371, 373, 
389, 399, 429, 446, 46 7, 490, 519, 521, 522, 
523, 524, 525, 526, 527, 572, 621, 661, 663, 
666, 671, 676, 684  
support  17, 36, 77, 109, 284, 377, 450, 476, 584, 
585, 629, 664  
Suraksha Koskh  ................................ .............  36 
Surcharge  ................................ ....... 72, 259, 378  
Surgical  ................................ ........................  491 
Surplus  ... 37, 100, 159, 175, 212, 213, 215, 216, 
347, 389, 406, 461, 462, 463, 485, 487, 500, 
501, 513, 519, 530, 540, 541, 542, 545, 546, 
608 
Survey  .... 79, 115, 157, 186, 188, 191, 243, 301, 
393, 396, 500, 531, 539, 599, 659, 667  
surveys  ............................ 38, 175, 208, 241, 667  
Suspense ... 10, 35, 37, 50, 56, 65, 68, 69, 78, 82, 
84, 86, 87, 98, 146, 209, 211, 213, 215, 216, 
280, 440, 441, 442, 445, 481, 482, 496, 499, 
508, 512, 513, 535, 536, 537, 543, 577  
Suspension  .................... 109, 127, 128, 577, 661  
Suvidha  ................................ ........................  273 
Switching  ................................ .............  378, 392  
Syllabus  ................................ ........................  576 
 
 
763 
For internal use of IA&AD  System  xxx, 3, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 41, 4 5, 
54, 57, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 97, 99, 108, 
114, 116, 117, 119, 120, 136, 137, 139, 142, 
143, 152, 153, 156, 159, 160, 164, 165, 166, 
170, 176, 182, 183, 184, 187, 194, 196, 200, 
209, 223, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 250, 253, 
254, 255, 260, 263, 268, 269 , 270, 271, 273, 
284, 286, 289, 300, 302, 305, 309, 314, 315, 
316, 317, 318, 319, 323, 334, 337, 340, 341, 
342, 346, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 
365, 366, 367, 371, 376, 378, 380, 381, 386, 
392, 395, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 403, 404, 
433, 434, 438,  439, 441, 442, 443, 446, 448, 
454, 455, 456, 457, 458, 460, 461, 462, 464, 
469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 479, 
480, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493, 
494, 495, 501, 502, 503, 506, 509, 511, 520, 
526, 534, 539, 540, 544, 546, 554, 557, 561, 
563, 570, 574, 578, 580, 584, 585, 587, 589, 
590, 594, 595, 596, 598, 600, 601, 607, 609, 
619, 622, 628, 656, 658, 659, 660, 661, 664, 
665, 666, 675, 676, 678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 
683, 684, 685, 687, 688, 689, 690, 691, 692  
Systems  ... 1, 2, 70, 106, 170, 182,  236, 239, 308, 
342, 365, 380, 416, 434, 455, 561, 583, 662  
T 
T.W.F.A  ................................ .......................  413 
TA 25, 26, 27, 44, 115, 145, 346, 357, 381, 554, 
557, 581, 675, 676, 677, 679, 680, 682  
Tabulation  .. 66, 67, 70, 441, 443, 448, 473, 477, 
503 
Tabulations ....................  441, 474, 476, 481, 502  
Tally  ................................ .............  143, 472, 473  
Target  ................................ ...........  181, 186, 545  
Targets  . 149, 233, 297, 298, 309, 311, 324, 340, 
454, 679  
Tariff  .............  226, 242, 254, 257, 261, 263, 326  
Tariffs  ................................ ..................  287, 293  
Tatkal  ................................ ...................  251, 252  
Tax . 41, 50, 51, 98, 99, 110, 145, 290, 441, 511, 
541, 578, 598, 672  
Taxes  .... 158, 188, 209, 2 10, 435, 477, 488, 489, 
527 
TC .................  221, 222, 248, 249, 270, 278, 536  
TCS ................................ .......409, 508, 541, 688  
TDMS  ................................ ..........................  314 
TDR  ................................ .............................  277 
TDS  ................................ ......................  230, 594  Technical  .. 79, 80, 102, 106, 107, 185, 186, 198, 
218, 248, 281, 284, 357, 358, 367, 372, 389, 
402, 503, 521, 523, 524, 554, 601, 616, 617, 
620, 629, 658, 662, 663, 664, 665, 666, 667, 
668, 669, 670, 671, 675, 680  
Techniques  ............  149, 349, 354, 587, 665, 668  
Technological  ................................ ...............  664 
Technologies  149, 386, 399, 552, 658, 663, 664, 
666, 669  
Technology  .. 167, 246, 314, 326, 382, 399, 624, 
625, 658, 659, 661, 6 62, 663, 664, 665, 667, 
670 
Telecom  302, 333, 365, 366, 388, 392, 394, 395, 
396, 397, 398, 399, 618, 619, 629, 666, 672  
Telecommunication  ..78, 80, 218, 295, 312, 367, 
386, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 
397, 398, 399, 400, 403, 404, 412, 413, 563  
Telecommunications  ....................  386, 578, 658  
Telegraph  ................................ .....................  392 
Telemetry  ................................ .....................  399 
Telephone ...................... 344, 392, 398, 489, 495  
Temporary  .... 186, 197, 209, 353, 494, 676, 677, 
683 
Tender  .. 20, 56, 57, 60, 155, 159, 178, 199, 214, 
215, 220, 221, 222, 232, 246, 278, 374, 401, 
404, 433, 458, 489, 500, 501, 502, 503, 506, 
507, 508, 509, 510, 520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 
536, 545, 558, 570, 578, 594, 599, 600, 601, 
609, 615, 660, 672, 678, 679, 680,683, 684, 
685 
Tendering  ....... 38, 156, 187, 221, 286, 502, 506, 
520, 562, 600, 601, 607, 633, 634, 635, 636, 
637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 
648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 672  
Tenders . 57, 58, 59, 64, 156, 158, 168, 187, 190, 
194, 209, 211, 213, 214, 215, 216, 218, 220, 
221, 226, 278, 286, 292, 327, 330, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 335, 336, 343, 346, 374, 38 9, 410, 
485, 486, 487, 489, 490, 492, 502, 503, 508, 
520, 521, 522, 526, 537, 600, 601,661, 681, 
683 
Terminal  ....... 243, 295, 299, 304, 309, 337, 351, 
360, 361, 364, 375, 409, 620  
Terminals  . 71, 75, 175, 177, 273, 297, 299, 300, 
301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 308, 310,  316, 322, 
332, 333, 334, 338, 340, 342, 343, 355, 360, 
616, 621  
Termination  ................................ ..................  681 
Terrestrial  ................................ .....................  408 
INDEX  
 
764 
For internal use of IA&AD  Testing  .. 187, 362, 372, 390, 392, 460, 492, 554, 
589, 658, 659, 661, 664, 665, 666, 669, 670, 
678, 679  
Testing Directorate  ................................ ...... 665 
Theft  ..... 209, 214, 347, 492, 493, 54 6, 568, 569, 
572, 580, 581, 681, 683, 685  
Thefts  ............................  212, 215, 216, 462, 487  
Thermit  ................................ ........................  670 
Thin Client  ................................ ... 248, 360, 361  
TIAs  ................................ .............................  263 
Ticketless  .............................. 243, 273, 289, 566  
Tickets  70, 71, 74, 236, 238, 241, 242, 245, 248, 
249, 269, 270, 272, 273, 274, 275, 277, 289, 
290, 291, 2 93, 346, 475, 531, 572  
Tier ................................ .................  99, 116, 117  
Time  ... 32, 33, 38, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56, 
57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 73, 76, 93, 
99, 100, 103, 107, 109, 112, 114, 115, 117, 
120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 131, 133, 
134, 155, 156, 160, 161, 162,  164, 165, 187, 
195, 196, 197, 200, 203, 219,220, 221, 222, 
223, 224, 225, 228, 229, 232, 236, 237, 240, 
242, 246, 255, 257, 258, 260, 261, 262, 263, 
264, 272, 273, 275, 277, 278, 281, 284, 289, 
291, 301, 302, 305, 306, 307, 308, 313, 314, 
315, 317, 318, 3 19, 326, 329, 330, 333, 334, 
337, 341, 342, 344, 347, 350, 352, 353, 354, 
355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 362, 363, 364, 
375, 376, 378, 381, 389, 391, 398, 402, 403, 
408, 409, 411, 438, 439, 442, 443, 444, 445, 
450, 451, 454, 456, 457, 460, 470, 471, 472, 
473, 474, 477, 483, 502, 511, 522, 527, 528, 
533, 539, 541, 542, 545, 554, 558, 559, 560, 
561, 566, 567, 573, 575, 576, 577, 585, 588, 
599, 601, 602, 614, 616, 633, 636, 651, 659, 
670, 672, 687, 690, 692  
Time tables  ................................ ...................  293 
Time -tabling ..................  299, 319, 338, 434, 456  
TMSxxx, 71, 176, 183, 185, 186, 244, 246, 247, 
248, 260, 302, 314, 316, 333, 354, 367, 418  
TNC  ................................ .....................  307, 360  
Toilet  ................................ ....................  293, 455  
Toilets  ................................ ..........................  237 
Tonnage  ................................ ....... 299, 313, 527  
Tool ....... 187, 403, 486, 489, 492, 493, 495, 683  
Tools  ...... 61, 141, 142, 152, 155, 159, 162, 168, 
171, 211, 212 , 213, 215, 216, 292, 327, 330, 
331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 346, 389, 392, 
399, 462, 486, 487, 490, 491, 493, 545, 546, 
617, 665, 666, 670, 672, 678, 680, 684, 685  Top down  ................................ ..... 178, 484, 659  
TOR  ................................ .............  508, 509, 545  
Tour  .......................  138, 140, 462, 617, 687, 690  
Tourism  236, 23 9, 297, 366, 584, 611, 617, 618, 
635 
Touting  ................................ .........................  566 
Township  ................................ .............  477, 478  
TPP ................................ ..............................  670 
Track  .. xxx, 45, 46, 78, 176, 177, 181, 183, 184, 
185, 186, 187, 191, 193, 194, 198, 199, 208, 
210, 260, 312, 314, 321, 353, 354, 377, 386, 
400, 401, 405, 406, 414, 415, 416, 524, 573 , 
658, 662, 665, 666, 669, 675, 679, 691  
Track Renewal  ................................ .............  208 
Tracking  ................................ ...............  179, 692  
Traction  .. 17, 314, 316, 337, 369, 370, 371, 372, 
373, 377, 429, 466, 498, 662, 664, 665  
Traction & Rolling Stock  ...............................  17 
Traffic  11, 13, 17, 35, 37, 39, 40, 54, 70, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 75, 78, 80, 88, 154, 175, 192, 199, 
205, 206, 220, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 
241, 242, 243, 247, 255, 256, 257, 258, 262, 
264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 270, 271, 275, 276, 
280, 281, 283, 284, 285, 286, 295, 297, 298, 
299, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 308, 310,  
312, 313, 314, 317, 318, 321, 322, 323, 324, 
325, 327, 328, 331, 335, 337, 338, 340, 342, 
343, 344, 348, 350, 351, 357, 365, 367, 369, 
375, 376, 377, 386, 399, 409, 413, 414, 421, 
422, 425, 428, 543, 566, 624, 625, 630, 667, 
679, 699, 702, 703, 704  
Train  . 45, 80, 105, 185, 186, 241, 247, 260, 274, 
283, 285, 297, 304, 308, 310, 312, 313, 316, 
317, 318, 324, 325, 326, 333, 342, 345, 346, 
347, 351, 354, 355, 356, 357, 359, 363, 364, 
365, 366, 367, 373, 392, 402, 408, 421, 425, 
428, 431, 432, 455, 456, 550, 551 , 559, 562, 
563, 564, 575, 629, 663  
Train examination  ................................ ........  308 
Train Operator Scheme  ................................  283 
Training  .... 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 43, 
44, 78, 93, 94, 95, 104, 106, 107, 111, 114, 
115, 125, 133, 143, 147, 167, 185, 186, 197, 
198, 199, 298, 301, 302, 311, 313 , 316, 317, 
334, 335, 340, 357, 358, 360, 361, 362, 373, 
380, 393, 395, 396, 404, 407, 412, 427, 428, 
429, 488, 553, 554, 557, 560, 567, 570, 573, 
575, 576, 585, 605, 668, 670  
Trainload  ................................ ......................  259 
 
 
765 
For internal use of IA&AD  Trains  ... 16, 45, 70, 71, 113, 149, 164, 165, 193, 
199, 236, 237, 241 , 242, 246, 247, 254, 285, 
295, 297, 298, 299, 301, 303, 304, 305, 306, 
307, 308, 309, 310, 312, 313, 315, 316, 317, 
318, 319, 320, 322, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 
329, 330, 332, 336, 337, 338, 340,341, 342, 
343, 344, 345, 346, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 
353, 356, 358, 359, 363, 371, 375, 381, 409, 
428, 429, 434, 456, 457, 459, 471, 550, 553, 
566, 568, 573, 617, 625, 635, 661, 668  
Trains Branch  ................................ ...............  307 
Transfer  .... 48, 78, 185, 206, 276, 347, 399, 425, 
448, 483, 496, 507, 532, 534, 537, 569, 571, 
616, 621, 627, 651  
Transhipment 241, 288, 291, 303, 304, 305, 309, 
328, 349  
Transit  .............................  65, 185, 187, 314, 538  
Transparent  ...... 3, 523, 600, 601, 607, 633, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 
644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 
687 
Transport  ...... 32, 43, 44, 78, 115, 1 64, 202, 255, 
257, 295, 297, 301, 305, 331, 343, 392, 404, 
406, 526, 563, 606, 616, 617, 624, 628, 662  
Transportation  ...... 115, 295, 297, 300, 301, 302, 
321, 322, 330, 337, 340, 347, 365, 367, 612, 
628, 629, 649  
Transshipment  ..............................  240, 305, 306  
Travelling  ..... 41, 44, 63 , 98, 114, 115, 151, 154, 
164, 250, 263, 275, 287, 289, 379, 550, 566, 
577, 588, 602, 608, 678, 680, 684, 685  
TrD ................................ ...............................  664 
Treasurer  ................................ ...... 209, 210, 605  
Treasury  ................................ .........................  85 
Treatment  ..... 153, 161, 164, 184, 185, 186, 464, 
673 
Trial ................................ ......................  609, 678  
Trial Balance  ................................ ................  609 
Trials  ..... 658, 661, 662 , 664, 665, 666, 667, 668  
Tribunal  ................................ .237, 281, 282, 283  
Triennial  ................................ .......................  660 
Tri-lingual  ................................ ....................  379 
Trimmer  ................................ .......................  670 
Trolleys  ................................ ........................  286 
TRR ................................ ..............  193, 555, 564  
TRS ................................ ..............................  6, 9 
TRT ................................ ......................  186, 340  
TSR ................................ .......193, 347, 555, 564  
TT ................................ ......... 321, 322, 323, 324  
TTE ...............................  248, 249, 270, 276, 293  Tuition  ................................ ..........  25, 26, 27, 81  
Tunnels ................................ .........................  669 
Turn Over Ratio  ................................ ...........  545 
turnover  ................................ ........  516, 518, 672  
TXR  ................................ ..... 304, 315, 316, 367  
U 
Ultrasonic  ................................ .....................  665 
UMID  ................................ .......................  97, 99  
Unaccounted  ................................ ................  291 
Uncovered  ................................ ............  508, 510  
Under  69, 99, 123, 124, 158, 186, 191, 199, 239, 
269, 273, 293, 341, 351, 367, 441, 446, 468, 
476, 506, 564, 585, 626  
Underta kes ............  237, 658, 661, 663, 665, 667  
Undertakings  ..........................  18, 204, 662, 667  
Undervalue  ................................ ...................  572 
Undisputed  ................................ ...................  598 
Undue  ... 55, 56, 57, 63, 164, 165, 209, 210, 221, 
229, 230, 278, 344, 349, 469, 475, 480, 522, 
542, 589, 600, 601, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 
638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 648, 649, 
650, 651, 652, 653, 654  
Uniform  .. 46, 138, 140, 211, 212, 213, 346, 462, 
485, 487, 488, 489, 491, 493, 495, 550, 585, 
586, 587, 594, 595, 685  
Unimpaired  ................................ ..................  599 
Union  ................................ 3, 4, 12, 32, 101, 102  
Unique  ...................  179, 180, 181, 358, 360, 688  
Unit .... 18, 21, 22,  39, 42, 44, 48, 49, 52, 66, 76, 
77, 89, 90, 95, 105, 108, 118, 146, 151, 152, 
153, 154, 159, 162, 170, 175, 176, 177, 199, 
214, 236, 244, 286, 300, 315, 340, 341, 365, 
386, 393, 399, 400, 410, 413, 425, 428, 438, 
440, 443, 448, 449, 461, 464, 467, 470, 47 2, 
473, 474, 475, 477, 479, 480, 484, 485, 496, 
499, 500, 509, 519, 532, 569, 606, 609, 625, 
663, 670  
Units  . xxx, 17, 20, 21, 28, 33, 39, 40, 47, 78, 82, 
83, 89, 95, 96, 102, 104, 128, 141, 142, 149, 
152, 154, 155, 156, 159, 176, 177, 178, 187, 
198, 236, 25 6, 285, 286, 300, 302, 303, 321, 
326, 330, 332, 369, 371, 372, 388, 393, 394, 
396, 397, 398, 400, 401, 421,422, 424, 425, 
427, 438, 447, 449, 451, 467, 469, 471, 472, 
475, 477, 479, 483, 484, 485, 499, 500, 501, 
502, 503, 506, 508, 509, 522, 532, 553, 567,  
569, 570, 584, 593, 606, 618, 658, 659, 663, 
671 
Unlawful  ................................ ...... 566, 570, 573  
INDEX  
 
766 
For internal use of IA&AD  Unloading  .... 238, 253, 254, 263, 303, 305, 308, 
309, 310, 326, 329, 330, 337, 341, 364, 375, 
459 
Un-Localised  ................................ ................  580 
Unpaid  ................................ ...131, 474, 475, 494  
unrealised  ................................ ...............  35, 265  
Un-remunerative  ................................  37, 54, 82  
Unreserved  ........  70, 71, 244, 245, 248, 269, 273  
Unserviceable  162, 448, 480, 498, 500, 501, 539  
Unusual  .... 54, 65, 219, 299, 304, 306, 330, 476, 
478, 536  
Up-gradation  ................................ ................  661 
UPI ................................ ........ 249, 251, 252, 270  
Upkeep  ..........  205, 397, 398, 429, 570, 578, 580  
Urinal  ................................ ...........................  237 
USFD  ................................ ...........  187, 212, 670  
UTHS  ................................ ...................  661, 675  
UTN  ................................ .............................  314 
UTS  .... 41, 70, 71, 236, 239, 241, 244, 245, 248, 
249, 251, 269, 272, 273, 274, 321, 395, 419  
V 
Vacancies  ...... 100, 102, 105, 125, 160, 575, 579  
Vaccination  ................................ ..................  154 
Vadodara  ............................... 612, 625, 628, 649  
Valuation  ...... 441, 476, 477, 500, 528, 544, 595, 
598, 599 , 600  
Variation  ................................ ...... 222, 224, 508  
Vehicle  . 25, 26, 27, 46, 184, 205, 288, 312, 315, 
316, 320, 328, 363, 366, 367, 392, 402, 436, 
437, 495, 570, 579, 580, 581, 622, 625, 626, 
628, 661, 665  
Vending  ................................ ........  239, 272, 285  
Vendor  . 509, 510, 514, 515, 516, 517, 520, 523, 
658, 660, 661, 663, 664, 666, 669, 671, 675, 
676, 677  
Vendors  160, 287, 293, 545, 633, 634, 635, 636, 
637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 
648, 649, 650, 652, 653, 654, 658, 661, 663, 
671, 676, 677  
Venture  205, 619, 621, 622, 623, 625, 626, 633, 
634, 6 35, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641  
Verification  ...... 67, 89, 105, 136, 138, 139, 140, 
142, 179, 185, 211, 212, 215, 216, 258, 268, 
288, 289, 290, 291, 378, 405, 407, 443, 462, 
486, 487, 488, 490, 491, 492, 493, 494, 495, 
507, 538, 539, 540, 544, 546, 578, 595, 59 7, 
598, 633, 672, 677, 681, 682, 683  
Verification Sheets  ................................ ....... 539 
VG................................ ........................  359, 367  Vice Chairman  ................................ ..... 282, 593  
Video  ................................ ....................  408, 409  
Vigilance  .. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 
30, 225, 254, 279, 373, 496, 588  
Vikas  .... 372, 611, 618, 624, 625, 626, 629, 630, 
636 
VIP 306, 327 , 333, 367, 379, 395, 396, 552, 575  
Vision  ................................ ...............  3, 373, 687  
Visiting  ................................  152, 160, 170, 302  
Volume .......................... 246, 281, 300, 377, 502  
Voluntary  ................................ ....... 51, 121, 134  
Voted  ................................ ............................  413 
Voucher  ...... 53, 59, 60, 231, 232, 267, 270, 441, 
462, 476, 477, 590, 596, 602, 615  
Vouchers  ...... 59, 64, 74, 90, 158, 191, 231, 232, 
264, 265, 266, 267, 274, 275, 276, 277, 290, 
410, 441, 443, 470, 476, 477, 480, 487, 489, 
490, 493, 494, 529, 530, 531, 532, 534, 537, 
544, 579, 590, 596, 602, 608, 609, 683  
VPUs  ................................ ............................  237 
W 
Wages  .... 47, 123, 124, 128, 129, 131, 211, 216, 
219, 225, 2 62, 429, 438, 439, 462, 470, 471, 
472, 474, 475, 478, 494  
Wagon  .... 72, 211, 212, 241, 243, 247, 257, 258, 
259, 260, 261, 265, 266, 267, 281, 283, 288, 
298, 301, 304, 307, 310, 311, 312, 313, 315, 
343, 344, 345, 348, 349, 352, 354, 364, 365, 
424, 425, 426, 427 , 428, 499, 513, 581, 612, 
623, 644, 667, 671, 675  
Wagon Investment Scheme  ..........................  283 
Wagonload  ................................ ...................  259 
Wagons  .... 72, 80, 239, 243, 246, 255, 258, 259, 
260, 261, 262, 263, 267, 268, 298, 299, 304, 
305, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 
315, 321, 322, 324, 328, 329 , 340, 341, 342, 
348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 354, 355, 356, 364, 
421, 425, 426, 428, 429, 431, 432, 451, 453, 
458, 459, 460, 461, 499, 561, 581, 621, 623, 
667, 668, 671  
Waiting ................................ . 237, 283, 355, 379  
Waival  ................................ ..........................  261 
Wanctoo  ................................ .......................  548 
Ward  ............................. 156, 491, 493, 509, 684  
Wards  ................................ ...........................  544 
Warehouse  ................................ ...........  244, 254  
Warehouses  ................................ ..................  499 
Warehousing  ................. 244, 283, 408, 498, 616  
Warrants  ................................ .......................  274 
 
 
767 
For internal use of IA&AD  Warranty  ...... 376, 377, 427, 456, 524, 525, 527, 
661, 677  
Washing  .. 46, 214, 295, 319, 337, 491, 681, 684  
Waste  .... 141, 142, 149, 155, 166, 454, 480, 684  
Water ...... 48, 118, 134, 137, 139, 141, 149, 150, 
151, 154, 166, 168, 182, 186, 195, 209, 210, 
237, 241, 243, 286, 348, 360, 373, 434, 441, 
453, 454, 477, 478, 488, 489, 617  
Ways  ................................ .....182, 331, 355, 568  
Weapon  ................................ ........................  567 
Weapons  ................................ ......................  578 
Web  99, 180, 182, 183, 246, 382, 457, 502, 504, 
516, 585, 668, 670, 69 0 
Website  ................................ .........................  548 
Weigh Bridge  ................................ ...............  667 
Weighbridges  ....... 259, 260, 297, 428, 432, 451, 
458, 459, 540  
Weighed  ................................ 259, 271, 541, 544  
Weighing  ................................ ......................  451 
Weighing Scales  ................................ ..........  451 
Weighment  ..... 72, 258, 259, 260, 279, 288, 291, 
293, 308, 349, 539, 540, 541, 546  
Weight  ..... 72, 255, 270, 271, 275,  364, 540, 543  
Weld  ..............................  183, 185, 186, 187, 670  
Welding  ................................ ........  187, 665, 671  
Welfare  ...... 37, 78, 81, 82, 93, 94, 96, 130, 132, 
133, 147, 149, 150, 154, 165, 202, 210, 216, 
225, 284, 398, 399, 489, 567, 568, 573, 651, 
673 
Western  ................................ .... 7, 625, 626, 693  
WGR  ................................ ............  444, 445, 446  
Wharfag e .... 73, 74, 75, 236, 238, 240, 242, 244, 
247, 255, 261, 262, 265, 266, 267, 272, 276, 
279, 288, 291, 293, 315, 347, 545  
Wheel  ............  283, 421, 427, 441, 466, 496, 510  
Wireless  ................................ .......................  392 
Wires  ................................ ............  344, 392, 413  
WISE .............................  249, 251, 252, 253, 434  
Withdrawal ....... 49, 76, 116, 280, 287, 32 5, 428, 
440, 460, 494  
WMS  ...............................  69, 442, 446, 479, 496  
Women  ................................ ...................  38, 573  
Work  .... 3, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 32, 33, 41, 44, 47, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 77, 79, 80, 90, 
97, 105, 107, 124, 125, 128, 132, 133, 137, 
139, 151, 156, 157, 160, 162, 167, 173, 174, 
175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 188, 190, 192, 193, 194, 197, 198, 199, 
200, 201, 202, 205, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220, 222, 223, 224, 225, 
226, 227, 229, 230, 231, 232, 237, 2 38, 246, 
267, 278, 298, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 
308, 310, 315, 317, 322, 327, 333, 334, 336, 
338, 346, 353, 372, 389, 390, 391, 392, 394, 
395, 397, 399, 406, 410, 411, 421, 427, 429, 
432, 433, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 
445, 446, 447, 449, 45 0, 452, 453, 456, 458, 
459, 460, 463, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 
474, 475, 476, 477, 480, 481, 483, 485, 486, 
487, 489, 490, 502, 503, 507, 521, 525, 527, 
529, 534, 536, 539, 544, 551, 552, 554, 556, 
558, 560, 567, 568, 579, 584, 595, 596, 599, 
600, 601 , 606, 609, 614, 619, 621, 628, 634, 
635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641, 642, 643, 
644, 645, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 
659, 669, 670, 671, 681, 682, 687, 691, 692  
Workers  ...... 66, 67, 70, 210, 216, 438, 443, 444, 
448, 454, 472, 473  
Workmen  ............  52, 81, 93, 1 23, 140, 171, 471  
Works  ... 1, 2, 3, 9, 24, 28, 37, 38, 53, 54, 55, 56, 
58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 77, 78, 79, 
82, 83, 86, 89, 90, 91, 93, 128, 131, 150, 
151, 152, 156, 157, 158, 170, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 187, 
188, 18 9, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 
200, 201, 202, 203, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220, 222, 223, 225, 
227, 228, 229, 230, 237, 283, 286, 298, 301, 
302, 303, 307, 314, 319, 325, 331, 333, 336, 
342, 370, 372, 373, 374, 375, 379, 389 , 390, 
392, 393, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 
406, 410, 412, 413, 419, 421, 422, 424, 427, 
428, 430, 431, 433, 434, 435, 437, 438, 442, 
444, 445, 447, 448, 453, 458, 464, 466, 467, 
468, 469, 470, 472, 477, 478, 480, 481, 483, 
486, 489, 491, 493, 496,  501, 502, 506, 512, 
521, 522, 528, 529, 530, 541, 542, 544, 553, 
555, 578, 579, 584, 596, 605, 616, 618, 628, 
629, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 639, 640, 641, 
642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 
651, 652, 653, 654, 661, 662, 668, 670, 675, 
676, 679, 680, 681, 698  
Works Registers  ................................ ...........  229 
Workshop  ... 39, 40, 66, 70, 81, 83, 86, 131, 160, 
161, 170, 187, 371, 376, 424, 426, 427, 429, 
434, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 445, 446, 448, 
455, 464, 470, 474, 477, 480, 481, 482, 485, 
496, 528, 567, 609, 611, 680, 690  
Worksh op General Register  .........  446, 480, 481  
INDEX  
 
768 
For internal use of IA&AD  Workshop Manufacture Suspense  ................  482 
Workshops  . 1, 9, 20, 33, 47, 66, 78, 79, 80, 130, 
133, 179, 197, 376, 381, 386, 393, 400, 408, 
417, 421, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 432, 
434, 436, 437, 439, 440, 442, 446, 447, 449, 
452, 453, 454, 464, 466, 469, 470, 471, 479, 
483, 485, 487, 499, 500, 513, 531, 541, 543, 
555, 559, 568, 611, 671, 674, 698  
World Bank  ................................ .. 204, 380, 411  
Wrecking  ................................ ......................  550 
write back  ................................ ....... 87, 195, 232  
Write off  ....... 158, 188, 189, 256, 292, 435, 485, 
492, 656, 685  
WTR  ................................ ............................  312 
X 
XENs ................................ ............................  174 
Y 
Yard  . 80, 81, 184, 259, 304, 307, 308, 309, 315, 
317, 318, 319, 320, 328, 340, 341, 342, 343, 
345, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 357, 358, 360, 
363, 365, 403, 413, 575  
Yards  .... 246, 295, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 
310, 313, 315, 342, 343, 344, 348, 349, 35 0, 
352, 375, 376, 568  Yatri  ................................ .............................  273 
Yearly  ........................... 146, 186, 541, 542, 543  
YTSK  ................................ ...........  272, 273, 286  
Z 
Zero  ................................ ..............................  338 
Zonal  xxx, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 29, 30, 
33, 34, 39, 40, 56, 74, 89, 94, 99, 100, 102, 
104, 106, 107, 124, 128, 130, 131, 133, 149, 
150, 151, 153, 156, 1 57, 160, 161, 162, 167, 
173, 174, 175, 178, 180, 187, 188, 197, 198, 
223, 236, 239, 240, 241, 246,247, 255, 256, 
260, 267, 268, 269, 284, 285, 286, 295, 297, 
298, 300, 301, 302, 303, 309, 310, 316, 318, 
319, 320, 321, 324, 325, 327, 328, 330, 333, 
334, 358 , 359, 360, 363, 364, 367, 370, 373, 
375, 376, 380, 381, 382, 387, 388, 389, 394, 
395, 400, 409, 424, 426, 427, 430, 436, 447, 
450, 451, 461, 486, 498, 499, 502, 507, 529, 
549, 551, 553, 554, 555, 558, 561, 562, 567, 
568, 572, 573, 576, 578, 593, 599, 606,  658, 
663, 664, 665, 666, 668, 669, 671, 675, 676, 
677, 680, 689, 690  
ZRTI  ................................ ............  302, 335, 367  
ZRUCC  .. 16, 18, 21, 25, 30, 241, 285, 331, 367, 
556 
 
