 
17 
 
DISTRICT LEVEL 
Chennai 
Region 
Velllore 
Region 
Trichy 
Region 
 Coimbatore 
Region 
Madurai 
Region 
Tirunelveli 
Region 
Tiruvallur 
Vellore 
Tiruchi 
Coimbatore 
Madurai 
Tirunelveli 
Kancheepuram 
Thiruvanna- 
malai 
Karur 
Erode 
Dindigul 
Tuticorin 
Villupuram 
Dharmapuri 
Ariyalur 
Namakkal 
Theni 
Virudhunagar 
Cuddalore 
Krishnagiri 
Thanjavur 
Ooty 
Sivagangai 
Nagerkoil 
 
Salem 
Tiruvarur 
 
Puthukottai 
 
 
 
Nagapattinam 
 
Ramanatha 
puram 
 
1.2)  Audit functions: The Local Fund Audit Department carries out the audit of Urban Local Bodies,Panchayat Raj           
Institutions and various miscellaneous institutions. 
 
The Municipalities, Municipal Corporations  and Town Panchayats are Urban Local Bodies and the Panchayat 
Unions, District Panchayats are Panchayat Raj Institutions.  The prime object of these bodies are providing amenities to 
the general public of the Local area.  It becomes incumbent on their part to raise funds through levy of taxes and fees to 
meet the expenditure incurred for providing various services which are either obligatory and discretionary in nature.  In 
addition to the funds raised, the grants released by the State and Central Governments for implementation of various 
welfare schemes are also credited to their funds. Consequently huge sum of money is received and spent every year by 
the Local bodies and the transactions are audited by the Local Fund Audit Department applying the general principles of 
audit. 
          The audit of Urban Local Bodies, Panchayat Raj Institutions, Universities, Market committees, Local Library 
Authorities are conducted by the staff of the Director of Local Fund Audit.   
 
 
The different types of audit done by the staff of the Director of Local Fund Audit is detailed below: 
 
1. Field Audit 
 
2. Concurrent Audit – Corporations / Municipalities / Panchayat Unions. 
 
Field Audit: The audit of the Municipalities (other than concurrent) Town Panchayats, District Panchayats, Market 
Committees, Local Library Authorities and other miscellaneous institutions are done by the field staff in the office of the 
Assistant Directors  in each district. Normally annual audit of these institutions is taken up. 
 
Concurrent Audit: The audit of all the Municipal Corporations,  Special Grade Municipalities certain Selection 
Grade Municipalities, Panchayat Unions and that of all the Universities are done concurrently by the audit staff stationed 
in the respective Institutions.   
 
As the annual audit is done mostly on receipt of the completed annual accounts from the institutions, following of 
the  time frame for submission of Accounts by the Local Bodies must be insisted.  The Assistant Directors should ensure 
this through periodical watch over the local bodies. 
 
The time frame fixed for completion of audit should be followed scrupulously by the audit staff.  The Regional 
Deputy Director and the Assistant Directors are responsible for ensuring the timely completion of audit by audit  parties. 
 
Availing mandays in excess of the allowed ones and overstayal at the institution must be avoided. 
 
The cases of non compliance by the local bodies in sending the Accounts should be brought to the notice of the 
Director through the Regional Deputy Director so that it can be taken to the notice of the concerned administrative Heads 
of the Departments by the Director of Local Fund Audit.    
 
 
18 
1.3)  AUDITABLE INSTITUTIONS 
 
The list of institutions auditable by the Director of Local Fund Audit are as follows:  (as on 1-1-2008) 
Sl.No. 
Institutions 
Numbers 
1 
Corporations 
10 
2 
Municipalities 
148 
3 
Town Panchayats 
561 
4 
District Panchayats 
30 
5 
Panchayat Unions 
385 
6 
Universities 
19 
7 
Market Committee 
25 
8 
Local LIbrary Authorities 
29 
9 
National Social Welfare Schemes 
29 
10 
Local Planning Authorities 
26 
11 
Miscellaneous Institutions 
9 
12 
Village Panchayats (22%) 
5563 
13 
State Institute of Rural Development 
1 
14 
State Centre for Higher Education 
1 
15 
Municipal Corporations /Municipal Employees Health Fund 
1 
16 
Tamil Nadu PanchayatEmployees Health Fund 
1 
17 
Tamil Nadu Rural Development  Employees Health Fund 
1 
18 
Rajaveda Padasalai, Kumbakonam 
1 
19 
Raja Chatram, Thanjavur 
1 
1.4) ENTRUSTMENT OF AUDIT 
 
The audit on the accounts of Local bodies viz., Municipalities, Municipal Corporations, Town Panchayats, 
Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats is conducted by the Local Fund Audit Department as per the provisions 
contained in the respective Acts of these local self Governments.   
 
The provisions in the Acts and various Government orders entrusting  the audit of various institutions to the Director 
of Local Fund Audit are mentioned below: 
Sl.No. 
Institutions 
Act Provision 
Order of Govt. 
1 
Corporations 
 
Chennai 
Section 140 of Madras City Municipal 
Corporation Act 1919  
Others :  
Section 171 of  the  respective Corporation  
Acts.  
 
 
G.O.Ms.No.93 Finance 
dt.28.3.2003.   
 
2 
Municipalities 
Section 122 of Tamil Nadu District  
Municipality Act 1920 
G.O.Ms.No.93 Finance 
Dated 28-03-2003 
3 
Panchayat Union 
Section 193 of T.N Panchayat Act 1994 
G.O.Ms. No.265 R.D. Dated  
22.12.1999 dt:22-12-1999 
4 
District Panchayats 
Section 141 (11) of Tamil Nadu 
PanchayatAct1958 
G.O. 
Ms.No.1722 
L.A. 
dt.15.10.1960                               
5 
Town Panchayats 
Sec. 122 of Tamil Nadu District Municipality Act 
1920 
G.O. Ms.No.1155 L.A.dt:11-6-
1952 
6 
Village Panchayats 
(Test Audit 22%)   
Sec. 193 of T.N. Panchayat Act 1994   
G.OMs. No.371, Finance 
Dept. dt:11-11-2002 
7 
Market Committee 
Rule 40 of TN Agricultural Produce 
Market Act 1959  
G.O. Ms. 1581/Agri/dt.4.7.73 
9 
Local Library 
Authority 
-- 
G.O. Ms. 1634/Edu/dt.30-5-
1950 
 
19 
 
 
The Government have reiterated in G.O. Ms. No. 93 Finance dept, dt:28/3/03 that the Director of Local Fund Audit would 
undertake the audit of all local bodies except Village Panchayats. 
1.5) Audit Planning: 
 
In January each year an Annual plan for the  audit of the institutions is to be prepared by the Deputy Director / 
Assistant Director.  The Plan is to be prepared based on the pending audits to be completed  institution wise and 
availability of parties and the mandays fixed for each. This annual programme should be got approved by the Regional 
Deputy Director / Director.  It is to be split up into quarterly programmes by the Deputy Director and Assistant Director. 
 
The following points should be borne in mind while preparing the Annual Audit Plan. 
 
A. Objective of the audit 
 
B. Areas to be covered 
 
C. Points to be seen 
 
D. Background material already available 
 
E. Additional information to be collected 
 
F. Methods of analysis of information 
 
G. Objections likely to be noticed 
 
H. Time frame for completion of audit 
 
The quarterly programme prepared by the Assistant Directors are approved by the respective Regional Deputy 
Directors.  The quarterly programme prepared by the Deputy Directors are approved by the Director. 
 
The audit plan must be prepared in such a way so as to ensure  that quality audit is performed in an economical, 
efficient and effective way and also at the right time.  This is done on the basis of information about the auditable 
institution.  The choice of audit strategy is based on the auditor‘s assessment.  The audit planning determines the scope, 
objectives and expected results of the audit.  In addition, the planning must form the basis of supervision and control of 
the audit efforts. 
i. 
 ABC Analysis in Audit 
 
This is an important concept in audit.  The auditor‘s efficiency lies in assessing the expenditure pattern of an 
Organization / Department and also by completing the audit in time.  The auditors before taking up their work, should call 
for the budgetary allocation of the organization and fix priorities of areas.  Mostly about seventy percent of the 
expenditure will be incurred in a few selected heads and the rest of the expenditure will be in other heads.  The 
expenditure in other heads will be meagre when compared to bulk expenditure incurred in a few selected sub-heads. 
 
Therefore instead of concentrating on the entire expenditures, the auditors should give preference  where the major 
part of the amount has been spent.  Based on the time available to go through the rest of the expenditure, the auditors 
may concentrate on the other expenditure.  Hence the concept of ABC analysis is not to leave out any important 
expenditure incurred by the Organization / Department.  If the auditors are satisfied in audit  as per ABC analysis, they 
can arrive at a conclusion that the Organization /Department has followed the guidelines for incurring expenditure 
scrupulously. 
ii) 
 VED ANALYSIS IN AUDIT 
 
This is also a new concept in audit.  Generally whenever audit work is taken up, the auditors would go through the 
entire expenditure incurred by the organization department and they would make their own findings, based on the nature 
of expenditure incurred, whether they have been duly spent as per the provisions of the rules or procedures. 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
Under this concept the expenditure are classified on three lines viz.  
 
V  =    Vital,  
 
E  =    Essential and    
 
D  =    Desirable.   
 
    The vital expenditures are one which are highly essential to the particular nature of activity of the institution / 
organisation.  The words vital, essential and desirable are purely relative terms and they may vary depending upon the 
activity of the Organization / Institution.  Certain expenditures might be vital for some institutions / organizations whereas 
the same may be either essential or desirable to some other institutions  /organisations.  The auditors should draw a 
clear line between these items of expenditure and view the same independently with logical thinking.  Therefore the 
auditors should not have a restricted view on  expenditure and consider the same according to the circumstances.  In the 
same manner, if the vital expenditures which were urgent in nature had been incurred, there might be little bit of deviation 
in observing procedures.  In such circumstances, the auditors should view the expenditure in that context and should not 
be too rigid, as such vital expenditure would have been incurred in view of urgency in the interest of organization / 
institution and ensure that it has not been made  intentionally. 
 
Therefore in order to maintain uniformity the auditor should adopt the following audit standards which have ethical 
significance; 
 
a) The auditor should be independent and should avoid conflicts of interest with the audited entity on matters that 
may impair their independence materially. 
 
b) The auditor must exercise due care and concern in complying with the auditing standards. 
 
c) The auditor should at all times maintain absolute Integrity and Devotion to duty. 
 
d) Auditors should not disclose information obtained in the auditing process to third parties, either orally or in 
writing. 
iii) 
MANDAYS ALLOWED FOR AUDIT : 
 
Mandays for Audit of Municipalities, Town Panchayats and Panchayat Unions are as follows : 
        Mandays will be modified as and when  the circumstances warrant. 
 
Municipalities 
  
 
 
 
 
Selection Grade   
225 days 
 
 
 
 
I Grade    
 
200 days 
 
 
 
 
II Grade   
 
125 days 
 
 
 
 
III Grade                    
100 days  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       For Kanyakumari   
                                                                                                                                                District  
 
Town Panchayats: Special Grade   
  
100 days 
 
              75 days 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection Grade   60 days    
 
 
40 days 
 
 
 
 
 
I Grade    
 30 days  
 
 
30 days 
 
 
 
 
 
II Grade   
 20 days  
 
             20 days 
(Director letter No.HRD-1/80631/99/dt.11-1-2000) 
 
 
 
21 
 
Panchayat Unions  
For audit of work vouchers  
 
1 day for an  expenditure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         of Rs.5.00 lakhs 
 
 
 
 
 
For audit  of establishment vouchers 
 
2 days 
 
 
 
 
 
For audit of deposit and advances    
 
4 days  
 
 
 
 
 
For audit of other receipts & expenditure 
 
1 day 
 
 
 
 
 
For verification of annual accounts    
 
7days 
 
 
 
 
 
For drafting of Audit slip and sending for  
 
 
 
 
 
perusal and discussion with commissioner   
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
and finalisation of Audit Report  
 
 
15 days 
 
Concurrent Audit system was introduced in Panchayat Unions w.e.f. 15-9-2000.  Mandays for Audit of  Panchayat 
Union Councils were fixed on the basis of the transaction. 
(Director Circular No.59006 / PU Audit –1 / 02 dt.1-10-2003 & 2-12-2003) 
(Director Circular No.12/04 / Rc. 7839/PUA-1 / 04 dt.25-5-04) 
Note:  Power to sanction excess mandays vests with  the Director of Local Fund Audit and  the subordinate officers as 
delegated. 
1.6) Audit of Accounts:  
 
It is an important function of audit to test the accuracy of the monthly and annual accounts of an institution.  Audit 
has to verify and certify the Annual Accounts of the institutions and append the audited Annual Accounts duly certified 
with the Audit Report. 
 
An Auditor is not expected merely to confine himself to the routine audit work. He should avail himself of the 
opportunity of assisting the Executive authority and accountants with his advice in matters affecting accounts, budget, 
etc. or the financial regularity of transactions. 
 
An examination of the authorised Schedules of Rates, or a comparative study may show that the data adopted for 
preparation of estimates for work, the cost arrived at are in order.  He may observe any peculiar features of the revenue 
receipts or expenditures which may be suggestive of possible leakage of revenue, of untapped sources of revenues, or 
of want of attention to financial considerations.  An auditor is concerned primarily with the accuracy of accounts and 
regularity of financial procedure and not with matters relating to administration 
 
 (i) Accounts of Urban Local Bodies: Urban Local Bodies were maintaining their accounts on single entry cash 
basis in which the  cash flow of Money received and spent during a financial year only is exhibited in the receipt and 
charges statement. 
 
In order to exhibit the true financial status of the Urban Local Bodies a new system viz. the accrual based accounts 
system confirming to the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles was introduced w.e.f. 1-4-1999 in some selected 
Municipalities and Corporations and was subsequently implemented in all Corporations and Municipalities with effect 
from 1-4-2000. 
(G.O. Ms No.8 MA&WS dt:06-01-1999)   (G.O. Ms. No.3, MA&WS Dept. dt:12-01-2000) 
 
The accrual based accounting system was introduced in the Town Panchayats with effect from 1-4-2002. 
(G.O. Ms. No.85  MA&WS Dept.  dt:5-3-02) 
 
Under the new system of accounts, the account books hitherto maintained viz. Cash book, Register of Receipts, 
Register of Expenditure, Posting Register have been dispensed with and the preparation of monthly / annual Trial 
Balance, Income and Expenditure Statement and Balance Sheet was introduced. 
 
Receipts Books and Payment Books were introduced and each transaction was exhibited in the Journal register 
and General Ledger. 
 
22 
 
Opening Balance Sheet was prepared as on 1-4-99, 1-4-2000, 1-4-2001 and 1-4-2002 with the available data in 
each ULB and the particulars were incorporated in the prescribed 24 schedules head wise. Verification of annual 
accounts is done based on the opening balance sheet and the 24 schedules updated every year with addition & 
deletions there on by the ULBs.  
(ii) 
Accounts of Panchayat Raj Institutions  and other institutions:  
 
In Panchayat Unions and other institutions cash based accounting system are being followed.  The accounts of 
these institutions have to be verified with reference to the cashbook, posting register and the related subsidiary registers 
during the course of audit.  The correctness should be ensured and the accounts have to be certified by the auditor and a 
certificate in the prescribed form have to be appended to the Audit Report. 
  
1.7)  Certification of Accounts: 
 
The verification and Certification of annual accounts of the auditable institution forms a major part of the annual 
audit. 
 
In Corporations, Municipalities and Town Panchayats where accrual based accounting system is adopted, the 
monthly Trial Balance received in the respective audit offices have to be verified and the defects noticed if any should be 
communicated to the Executive authority. 
 
The annual Trial Balance, Income and Expenditure, Balance Sheet are verified during the annual audit.  The 
correctness of the postings in the ledger are to be verified with reference to the related subsidiary Registers. 
 
Minor defects if any noticed can be rectified by the audit staff and the major defects should be taken to the 
knowledge of the Executive Authorities for rectification during the course of audit.  The auditor should satisfy that the 
annual accounts exhibit a true and fair status of the institution. After thorough scrutiny and verification the accounts are to 
be certified by the auditor and a certificate to the effect have to be appended with the Audit Report in the prescribed 
format. 
Audit Certificate 
 
Government in G.O. Ms. No.93, Finance  (FC IV) Dept. dated:28-3-2003 have prescribed the following audit 
certificate to be appended to the audit reports of Corporations and Municipalities.  The same has been communicated 
in circular No.13/2006 (RC No.34964/05/MA05 dt:2-2-2006 )of the Director of Local Fund Audit . 
Certificate 
 
I have examined the Receipts and Payments account, Income and Expenditure account for the year ended  31-3-        
and the balance sheet as on -------------------------- of ----------------------. 
 
I have obtained the information and explanations that I have required and subject to the observations in the 
appended audit report.  I certify, as a result of my audit, that in my opinion these accounts and Balance Sheet are 
properly drawn up so as to exhibit true and fair view of the state of affairs of the ..................................Municipal 
Corporation according to the best of information and explanation given to me and as shown by the books of the 
Organisation.  Subject to the remarks furnished in Part-I of AR and para No. ...... to ......... of the Audit Report for which 
necessary rectification through JVS is to be done by the Commissioner in the closing balance sheet.  
                                              
                                    for Director of Local Fund Audit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
2) 
 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF AUDIT  
1.  
The audit entrusted by the Government by virtue of the power vested in them under the various Acts regulating the 
institutions is statutory audit. In the case of institutions for which the Director is appointed as the auditor by mere 
executive orders, not based on the Express provision of any Act, the audit done is non-statutory. The chief among 
the audits done by this department both from the point of view of magnitude of expenditure audited and the time 
taken for audit is the audit of the funds of Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils,  Panchayat Union Councils, 
Town Panchayats, Universities, Estates under the control of official Receivers, Local Library Authorities, Market 
Committees, etc.  
 
According to G.O.Ms.No.1035, Finance (Funds), dated 14th November 1980, the accounts of all the institutions 
receiving grants-in-aid exceeding Rs.20,000 (recurring) per annum and Rs.l,20,000 (non-recurring) without any ceiling 
shall be audited by the Director of Local Fund Audit. The orders sanctioning grants-in-aid exceeding Rs.20,000 per 
annum (recurring) and RS.l,20,000 (non-recurring) should state clearly that the recipient institutions should be prepared 
to submit their accounts to the Director of Local Fund Audit for audit. In order to enable the Director of Local Fund Audit 
to undertake the audit of the accounts of these grants-in-aid institutions, the Government have directed that sanctions for 
the payment of the grant should incorporate the following conditions:-  
i.  The Payment of the grant is subject to the conditions that the accounts of the grantee will be open to audit by 
the Director of Local Fund Audit.  
ii.  The actual cost of audit will be recovered from the institutions, for the audit done by the Local Fund Audit 
Department.  
iii.  Any audit in pursuance of these orders will be undertaken in consultation with the administrative department 
concerned, who will make necessary arrangements with the institutions for the conduct of such audit.  
iv.  As regards the institutions which receive assistance less than the limit of Rs.20,000 (recurring) and Rs. l,20,000 
(non-recurring), the Departments of Secretariat are requested to furnish necessary utilisation certificates in 
respect of all grants whether they are subjected to audit by the Accountant-General or by the Director of Local 
Fund Audit or by Private audit.  
Note: 
While sanctioning grants to non-Government institutions exceeding Rs.20,000/-p.a.recurring (even if it exceeds 
RS.25 lakhs p.a. recurring) and grants/loans exceeding Rs.I,20,000-/p.a. non recurring (even if it exceeds Rupees one 
crore p.a. non recurring) a condition should be incorporated in the sanction order to the effect that their accounts are 
subject to audit by Director of Local Fund Audit for which audit fees at prescribed rates shall be recoverable. The audit 
done by the Director of Local Fund Audit will be in addition to the superimposed audit done by Accountant General under 
Sec. 14(l) or 14(2) of C&AG Act 1971.  
(Govt.Lr.No.113987 / LF / 90 / Fin, dt:26.3.9I, communicated in Director Lr. No. Roc.F3173164/89/ft: 12-4-1991)  
2.1)  SCOPE OF AUDIT 
 
The instructions contained in the succeeding paragraphs are framed mainly to suit an effective and efficient audit.  
 
The scope of comprehensive auditing falls into three Divisions, namely:-  
a.  
Financial Accountability and Compliance (Financial Audit):  
 
This is to determine (i) whether financial operations are properly conducted, (ii) whether the entity has complied 
with the applicable Act and Rules framed there under and other regulations, (iii) whether the final reports of the audited 
entity are presented fairly.  
b. 
Performance Efficiency: (management Audit) 
 
This is to determine whether the entity is managing or utilising its financial propriety and personnel resources 
economically and to detect the causes of any inefficiency or uneconomical practices, including inadequate management 
systems, administrative procedures and organisational structure. 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
c.  
Programme Evaluation: (Performance Audit):  
 
This is to determine whether the desired results or benefits are being achieved; whether the broad objectives 
established by the authorities concerned are being met; and whether the executive agency has considered alternatives 
which might yield the desired results at a lower cost.  
 
2. Audit generally involves audit of individual transactions  and large focus on the evaluation of the scheme or the 
programme to which these transactions relate.  
 
The audit against regularity and propriety has been considered inadequate for an assessment of the performance 
of an organisation in terms of its goals, objectives or programmes.   
 
Performance audit seeks to ascertain whether the resources have been utilised efficiently by deploying them in an 
optimum manner.  
 
A performance budget highlights the extent to which resources are proposed to be put to productive uses. It also 
communicates as to what extent quantified benefits could be expected from the manner of deployment of resources.  
 
The scope of audit in the changed situation has to be adjusted to the results expected of public expenditure. Audit 
should rightfully bring out the cases where the utilisation of resources is found to be sub-optimal. Performance audit is a 
necessary component of a system of performance budgeting.  
Note: 
In order to have our audit approach more on the performance aspect and result oriented, it has been decided to 
send a consolidated performance report to Government for each financial year. For sending consolidated performance 
report to Government the particulars as per the performance given in Head office Lr.Rc.No.27934/cc1l91dt:22.4.92 
should be furnished to Director Office on completion of audit of Municipal Corporations/Municipal Councils / Municipal 
township Committees.  
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
Audit as defined in Paragraph 7 of ―An introduction to Indian Government Accounts and Audit‖ is an instrument of 
financial control. The basic principles of audit have been described as follows:-  
i. 
Audit should be conducted by an agency independent of the authority charged with the duty of carrying on the 
business and of the maintaining accounts of the transactions which pass through its hands. (Paragraph 19 of an 
Introduction to Indian Government Accounts and Audit)  
ii. 
It must ensure that the accounts maintained truly represent facts, that the rules and orders framed by competent 
authority in regard to financial matters have been obeyed, that expenditure has been incurred with due regularity 
and propriety and it must bring to the notice of competent authority any irregularity or impropriety in connection 
therewith. (paragraph 8 of an Introduction to Indian Government Accounts and Audit)  
iii. 
In order to curtail irregular and unauthorised drawl of money from local body funds by the executive authorities and 
to instill in them a greater sense of responsibility as the custodian of local body funds, Government have ordered 
that the drawing officers infringing the rules should be severely dealt with by punitive action including dismissal from 
service and criminal action. The executive Authorities shall ensure that all the categories of bills are prepared as 
per rules 
(G.O.Ms.No.145I, R.D.&L.A., dated 23-9-1978 read with G.O. Ms. No. 264, Finance (T&A), dated 28-3-1978) 
 
In other words, the auditor has an inherent right of independent criticism and his primary function is to verify the 
accuracy and completeness of accounts to ensure that all revenue and receipts due under the respective Acts of  Rules 
made there under are properly demanded and realized, that all revenue and receipts so called be brought to account 
under the proper head, that all disbursements and expenditure are authorised, vouched for and correctly classified and 
that the final account represents a complete and true statement of the financial transactions it purports to exhibit.  
 
 
 
25 
 
2.2) STATUTORY AND NON-STATUTORY AUDIT 
 
Both the statutory and non-statutory audits are conducted on behalf of the Government. It is therefore, not the 
function  of  audit to criticise the orders passed by the Government though it will not be beyond its scope to see that 
financial rules and orders passed by the Government satisfy the provisions of law and are otherwise free from audit 
objections and bring the same to their notice. It is, however, one of the important duties of audit to see that the rules and 
orders framed by Government are properly observed and that where financial rules are framed by local bodies or their 
subordinate authorities they satisfy the requirements of law and are otherwise in order and are properly applied.  
 
It is not the function of audit to prescribe as to what such orders shall be or to interfere with their administrative 
application. Even in the actual audit of transactions, an auditor must recognise the clear distinction between auditorial 
and administrative functions. Criticisms offered by the Local Fund Audit Department must, therefore, be limited to 
financial criticism based on the actual accounts. It is not the function of audit to range over the field of administration or 
statistics and offer suggestions how affairs may better be conducted.  
 
The Executive Authorities and not the Local Fund Audit Department are responsible for finding money for the 
administration of the fund, or for enforcing economy in expenditure. It is therefore not for audit to suggest new sources of 
taxation. It is, however, the duty of audit to offer its comment on the financial position of the local body and bring to notice 
wastefulness in administration and infructuous expenditure. Generally, a local body, mindful of  the best interest  of the 
tax payer, will welcome suggestion to promote economy based on information forthcoming from the accounts. But, such 
suggestions should be made sparingly and with discrimination.  
 
 
 
In the course of scrutiny of accounts and transactions, audit is entitled to make such queries and observations and 
to call for such vouchers, statements, returns and explanations in relation to them as may be necessary. All queries and 
observations shall be couched in language which is courteous and impersonal.  . 
2.3) ISSUE OF SUMMONS 
  
In auditing the accounts of Local bodies, audit should not make independent enquiries from private individuals or 
members of the general public. Audit should confine itself to calling upon the executive  authority to furnish necessary 
information and in cases of difficulty; it should confer with the executive authority  as to the best means of obtaining the 
evidence which it requires. If the necessary documents are not produced and the progress of audit is retarded thereby, 
the auditor can under the ―Audit, Surcharge and Disallowance Rules‖ in the case of Municipal Corporation, a Municipal 
Council,  a Town Panchayat, a Panchayat Union Council or Local Library Authority or Market Committee enforce their 
production by the issue of summons there for. The power should however be used sparingly and only in cases of 
persistent default and as an extreme measure.  
 
The form of summons is furnished below: 
FORM OF SUMMON I  
To  
 
A.B.(Address and descriptions)  
 
You are hereby required to produce or cause to be produced before me on the ..............  day of........................ at 
............ O‘ Clock the following documents, the perusal or examination of which is believed to be necessary for the 
elucidation of the following accounts of ............... for the year  
Auditor.  
 
 
 
26 
 
FORM OF SUMMON II  
To  
 
A.B. (Address and descriptions)  
 
You are hereby required to appear in person before me on the day of at .......... 
O‘ Clock, such appearance 
being necessary as you have the custody or control of or are accountable for the following documents, the perusal or 
 
examination of which is believed to be necessary for the elucidation of the following accounts of…… for the year 
……(List of document)  
Auditor.  
Note: 
1. ―Cases of failure to obey the summons  to the DLFA who will intimate them to the District Magistrate 
concerned.  The District Magistrate will, on receipt of intimation from the Director of LF Audit, direct local public 
prosecutors to appear on behalf of the Director, in cases falling under the penal provisions of the relevant statutes, in so 
far as failure to obey the summons issued under the Acts or the Rules framed there under is concerned. The Director will 
instruct the Public Prosecutors as regards the facts of each case‖.  
(G.O.Ms.No.4I3, Finance, Dept., dated 20th May 1926)  
Note: 
2. Non-production of records and registers particularly in respect of grant works should be brought to the notice 
of the Executive Authorities by Special Letters immediately during the course of audit and the Office copy of the letter 
should be kept along with the Office copy of the Audit Report.  
 
If there is no response, the Executive Authorities should be appraised of the position in person and in writing again 
so that they may not contend later that auditor did not keep them informed, about this.  
 
Finally the provision for summoning the records conferred in Rule 18 under Schedule V of the City Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1919, Rule 16 under Schedule I1I of the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971, Rule 16 under 
Schedule I1I of the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981, Rule 57 under Schedule IV of the Tamil Nadu 
District Municipalities Act, 1920, Rule 158 under Chapter V of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Produce Markets Rules, 1962, 
and Rule 2 under paragraph 30 of Chapter-II of the Manual on Panchayat Administration (Part-II) should be exercised 
calling for the records from the persons having the custody of records. It must be noted that the summons should be 
specific and should furnish the details of files and records required.  
(Standing Order No. 5 / 71 of LF Audit )  
Note: 
3. i. The summons should be served on a specified person mentioning his name and designation so that the 
complaint can be preferred in the Court against the particular person.  
ii. 
The date for the production of records or to appear in person should be given in such a way that at least 15 clear 
days are allowed from the date of acknowledgement of the summons.  
iii.  
The summons should be issued only after obtaining orders of the Assistant Director. 
iv.  
The summons should be sent by R.P.A.D. only and postal acknowledgement for service carefully preserved with 
the Office copy of the summons.  
2.3.1) 
DISHONOUR OF SUMMONS: 
 
 
The dishonor of summons by the Executive Authorities of Local Bodies is technically an offence but no prosecution 
can be launched immediately against the Executive Authorities of Local Bodies without the prior sanction of the 
Government. In the case of dishonour of summons a special report shall be made to the concerned administrative 
authorities by the Assistant Director about the dishonour of summons so that the administrative authorities may take 
appropriate action against the Executive Authority concerned for failure to respond to audit requisition for records and the 
delinquent can be made to feel sense of responsibility. The fact of issue of summons to the particular Executive Authority 
(name of the Executive Authority to be mentioned) and the dishonour of summons, viz., the non-production of records by 
the Executive Authority or anyone of his subordinates or satisfactory explanation furnished on or before the date fixed 
 
27 
shall be indicated in the special report and the default on the part of Executive Authority shall be reported immediately to 
administrative authority to take suitable action against the delinquent.  
  
In the case of dishonor of summons, the complaint should be made to the Court within three months of the 
Commission of offence. If there is no response from the administrative authorities to the special report make within a 
reasonable time, the connected file leading to the issue of summons and report. to. the administrative authorities about 
the non-production of records and dishonor of summons should be sent to Head Office in time (Le. atleast before the 
expiry of two months from the date of Commission of the offence) so as to enable the Director to obtain the orders of 
Government for prosecuting the Executive Authorities concerned.  
(Standing Order No.50/71, dated 17-9-1971)  
 
 
 
2.4) AUDIT OF RECEIPTS 
 
It is primarily the responsibility of the departmental authorities to see that all items of revenue and other dues, which 
have to be brought to account are correctly and promptly assessed, realized and credited to the Local Bodies. The 
Director has been entrusted with the audit of accounts of both receipts and expenditure and as such, it is also one of the 
important functions of the Audit Department to see that all sums due to the local body have been realized and properly 
accounted for. It should also see that the initial accounts of demand have been properly prepared, that all items of 
demand have been entered in the Accounts, that the demand arrived at in the case of taxes and fees is generally correct, 
and that adequate steps have been taken to enforce recovery. Any investigation by audit in this regard must be so 
conducted as not to interfere with the executive responsibility.  
  
In conducting the audit of receipts, audit should ascertain that adequate regulations and procedure have been 
framed to secure an effective check on the assessment and collection of revenue and to see by an adequate detailed 
check that any such regulations and procedure are being observed and that demand, collection and balance statements 
are regularly prepared and agreed with those of the subsidiary registers of demand and collection and that balances are 
regularly reviewed or checked in the manner specified by the statutory rules, Government Orders or regulations, if any. In 
the audit of receipts ordinarily, the general is more important than the particular.  
 
It would be necessary to ascertain what checks are imposed against the commission of irregularities at the various 
stages of collection and accounting and to suggest any appropriate improvement in the procedure. Audit might for 
instance, suggest in a particular case that a test inspection should be carried out by comparing by  a sample· set of 
receipt counterfoils with the receipts actually in the hands of tax payers or other debtors, the results of such an inspection 
being made available to audit.  
Note: 
At the instance of the Audit Department, the Executive Authority of Municipal Council has been required to 
compare atleast 5 percent of the originals of the receipts given to tax payers in each month with the relevant entries in 
the demand register concerned and to record in a separate Register of the receipts so compared. This  work is required 
to be done by the Executive Authorities in respect of Panchayats.  
 
The audit of receipts should be regulated mainly with reference to the statutory provisions or financial rules or 
orders which may be applicable to the particular receipts involved. . If the test check reveals any defect in such rules or 
orders the advisability of amendment should be brought to notice.  
 
It is, however, rarely if ever the duty of audit to question an authoritative interpretation of such rules or orders and in 
no case may audit review a judicial decision or a decision given by an administrative authority in a quasi Judicial 
capacity. This instruction does not, however, debar an auditor from bringing to notice any conclusion deducible from the 
examination of the results of a number of such decisions.  
 
Where any financial rule or order applicable to the case prescribes the scale or periodicity of recoveries, it will be 
the duty of audit to see, as far as possible, that there is no deviation without proper authority from such scale or 
periodicity.  
 
28 
 
Ordinarily, audit will see that no amounts due to local bodies are left outstanding on their books without sufficient 
reason. Audit will continue carefully to watch such out standings and suggest to departmental authorities any feasible 
means for their recovery. Whenever any dues appear to be irrecoverable, orders for their write off should be sought. But 
unless permitted by any rule or order of a competent authority no sums may be credited to a local body by debit to a 
suspense head; credit must follow and not precede actual realisation.  
  
A claim or demand may be either (i) a specific demand fixed or fluctuating( all taxes are of this nature) or (ii) a 
demand which arises in consequence of some outgoing property, or cash, advance or service in which it is a QUID PRO 
QUO. Of the latter nature are the demands set by the sale or lease of land, property, farm produce, etc., by cash 
advances and services such as transport. The check that can be exercised in audit against (ii) will depend upon the 
nature of the demand and the exact circumstances in which it is made. The demand will in all cases be entered in a 
demand register of advances or some other register prescribed for the purpose in the rules or regulations.  
(Paragraph 243 of an Introduction to Indian Government Accounts and Audit)  
  
Frauds and embezzlements are not infrequent in the collection of revenue in local bodies. A special zeal should 
therefore be shown in investigating into reported frauds. The system of revenue collection should be closely scrutinized 
to see whether the fraud or defalcation was rendered possible by any defect in the rules or whether it was due to neglect 
of rules or the want of supervision on the part of any person responsible for the administration of the fund. It is the duty of 
audit, therefore, at such investigation, to suggest safeguards that are likely to prevent the recurrence of such frauds or 
defalcation.  
  
Objections for want of payee receipts in support of disbursements made are serious one as such cases on 
investigation may at times, disclose frauds or defalcations. Objections of this nature therefore deserve immediate 
attention and investigation. The Head of Audit Party should, therefore, prepare a report in the form of a Paragraph for the 
audit report soon after the defect is noticed and after obtaining the approval of the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit 
communicate it to the Executive Authority of the Local Body for immediate action. The paragraph containing the defect 
should be suitably modified with reference to the reply of the Executive Authority and included in the audit report.  
2.5) AUDIT OF EXPENDITURE 
  
General Principles-Expenditure from the funds of local bodies is subject to the following essential audit checks: 
i. 
That the funds have been expended only on the purpose authorised by the Acts or Rules:  
ii.  
That the moneys made available for the expenditure have been provided for in the manner specified in the acts or 
Rules;  
iii.  
That the funds earmarked for specific purposes have been utilised for such purposes alone; and  
iv.  
That the sanction, either special or general, of the Authority competent to sanction the expenditure has been 
obtained.  
 
It is an implied condition that the expenditure should be incurred from the funds of local bodies with the due regard 
to the broad and general principles of financial propriety. Any cases involving a breach of these principles and thus 
resulting in improper expenditure or waste of public money should be treated by audit in the same manner as cases of 
irregular or unauthorised expenditure are treated.  
 
Conditions (i), (ii) and (iii) mentioned in the foregoing paragraph are mainly governed by the acts of the Legislature 
or rules, or regulations issued by authorities empowered in this behalf. Auditors must, therefore, familiarise themselves 
with the relevant sections of the Acts and the Schedules thereto and the rules and regulations contained in the Codes 
and Manuals.  
2.6) AUDIT AGAINST REGULARITY 
 
Audit against regularity consists in verifying that the expenditure confirms to the relevant provisions of the Acts or 
Rules made there under and is also in accordance with the financial rules, regulations and orders issued by a competent 
authority either in pursuance of any provisions of the-Act or in virtue of powers formally delegated to it by a higher 
authority. The rules, regulations and orders against which audit is conducted mainly fall under the following categories: 
i.  
Rules and orders regulating the powers to incur and sanction expenditure from the revenues of the local bodies;  
 
29 
ii.  
Rules and orders dealing with the mode of presentation of claims against local bodies, withdrawing money from the 
accounts of the local bodies, and in general the financial rules prescribing the detailed procedure to be followed by 
Officers and Servants in dealing with the transactions of local bodies and;  
iii.  
Rules and Orders regulating the conditions of service and pay and allowances and pension of Officers and 
Servants of Local bodies.  
 
The work of audit in relation to regularity of expenditure is of a quasi-judicial character. It involves the interpretation 
of statute, rules, and orders with reference to the case law‖ of previous decisions and precedents. Interpretation by Audit 
should be based on the plain meaning of the section, rule or order, except where this is inconsistent with another section, 
rule or order; in such a case the inconsistency should be referred to the competent authority for resolution or removal. In 
no case must interpretation by Audit ever verge of legislation.  
  
But audit against sanctions to expenditure is a complicated affair and requires the careful attention of the auditor. 
Authorities competent to sanction expenditure out of funds of local bodies are mentioned in the Acts, rules, regulations or 
by-laws relating to such bodies and it is primary duty of audit to see that every item of expenditure is covered by the 
sanction of the proper authority. The determination of the proper authority will depend upon whether (a) the sanctioning 
authority possesses full powers in respect of expenditure under audit or (b) whether the sanctioning powers are subject 
to any limitations. In respect of expenditure sanctioned by authorities having  full powers of sanction it is enough to 
confine audit merely to considerations of propriety but in respect of others the effect of conditions and restrictions should 
be clearly grasped  and audit should challenge every item of higher sanction is necessary. This is a field where 
controlling authorities depends upon audit to control the financial operations of the local bodies. It is here that audit can 
perform useful functions as an instrument of financial control. In judging which items require sanction, difficult cases often 
arise when the spending authorities split up schemes to avoid higher sanction. What is a single scheme, audit is not 
infrequently called upon to decide especially in the case of expenditure on works.  
 
Audit, to ensure the four conditions indicated so far, carries out what may be called the formal examination of 
sanctions and rules regulating such expenditure. It is an essential function of audit to bring to light not only cases of clear 
irregularity but also every matter which in its judgment appears to involve improper expenditure or waste of public money 
or stores, even though the accounts themselves may be in order and no obvious irregularity has occurred. It is thus not 
sufficient to see that sundry rules or orders of competent authority have been observed. It is of equal importance to see 
that the broad principles of orthodox finance are borne in mind not only by disbursing officers but also by sanctioning 
authorities. No precise rules have been laid down for regulating the course of audit against propriety. The general 
principles which have long been recognised as standards of financial propriety are detailed below:   
i.  
The expenditure should not be prima facie more that the occasion demands. Every Public Officer is expected to 
exercise the same vigilance in respect of expenditure incurred from public money as a person of ordinary prudence 
would exercise in respect of expenditure of his own money;  
 
ii.  
No authority should exercise its powers sanctioning expenditure to pass on order, which will be directly, or indirectly 
to its own advantage;  
iii.  
Public moneys should not be utilised for the benefit of a particular person or section of the Community unless:  
a.  The amount of expenditure involved is insignificant; or  
b.  a claim for the amount could be enforced in a court of law; or  
c. The expenditure is in pursuance of a recognized policy or custom.  
iv. 
The amount of allowances such as traveling allowances, granted to meet expenditure of a particular type, should be 
so regulated that the allowances are not, on the whole sources of profit to the recipients.  
 
The proper discharge of duties by an Audit Officer in this field is a very delicate matter and requires much discretion 
and tact. A challenge against expenditure should not be expressed as based on ―cannons of financial propriety‖, but as 
transgressing a universally accepted standard of official conduct or financial administration. The same principles hold 
good in respect of expenditure from Local Funds also.  
  
The audit of rates paid for work done and supplies made should receive special attention, but as objections can be 
raised only on grounds of financial propriety, this audit will usually present considerable difficulty. It demands the 
 
30 
exercise of great intelligence and care. Individual abnormalities in rates should of course be watched, but the institution, 
from time to time, of a comparative examination through the vouchers and accounts received for audit, of the rates paid 
by various Officers in the same of neighbouring localities, may indicate cases in which, the rates being abnormal, further 
enquiry may be desirable. It is of considerable importance that the audit checks prescribed should be observed in spirit 
and not in the letter as opposed to the spirit. The instructions relating to detailed audit of vouchers in support of payments 
are contained in the other succeeding chapters of the Manual.  
 
The general instructions set out in the preceding paragraphs can be expressed in a  detailed form as below:-  
 
The objects of audit expenditure are to ensure:  
i. 
that there is provision of funds for the expenditure duly authorized by a competent authority;  
ii. 
that the expenditure is in accordance with a sanction properly accorded and is incurred by an Officer competent to 
incur it;  
iii. 
that the claims are made in accordance with rules and in proper form;  
iv. 
that all prescribed preliminaries to expenditure are observed such as proper estimate prepared and approved by 
competent authority for works expenditure, etc.  
v. 
that expenditure sanctioned for a limited period is not admitted in audit beyond that period without further sanction;  
vi. 
that the rules regulating the method of payment have been duly observed by the disbursing officer;  
vii.  that payment has, as a fact, been made to the proper person and that it has been so acknowledged and recorded 
that a second claim against the local body on the same account is impossible.  
viii. that the charge is correctly classified and that if a charge is debitable to the personal account of a contractor, 
employee or other individual or is recoverable from him under any rule or order it is recorded as such in a 
prescribed account;  
ix.  
that the rates paid for work done or supplies made are in accordance with any scale or schedule prescribed by 
competent authority; and  
x.  
that the payments have been correctly brought to account in the original accounts.  
2.7) GRANTS-IN-AID 
 
Grants-in-aid paid by Government to local bodies are of two kinds, viz., statutory and non-statutory. A non-statutory 
grant is further classified as conditional and unconditional. Where conditions are attached to the utilisation of the grant, 
these usually take shape of specification of the particular objects on or the time within which the money must be spent. 
Whatever be the nature of the conditions, audit is not diverted of responsibility for seeing that they are fulfilled. Where no 
conditions are attached to a grant audit it  is in no way concerned with the manner in which the grant is utilized by the 
grantee.  But it should be seen in audit that the local body has claimed and realized all the grants due to it under the 
provisions of the statutes and also under the administrative rules and orders of Government. It should also be seen that 
the amount of grant due has been noted in the Miscellaneous Demand Register or some other register and its realization 
watched through it and the grant has been claimed in proper time. In respect of grants adjusted in the accounts at the 
treasury and credited in the pass book of the local body, it should be seen that they have been taken credit for in the 
cash book and the accounts of the local body; that the local body is eligible for the grants; that the conditions if any, 
attached to the drawl of grant have, as seen from the accounts, statement of expenditure prepared for the purpose and 
the concerned vouchers, been fulfilled; and that the grants were utilised properly.  
 
Unless it is otherwise ruled by Government, grant made for a specified object is subject to the implied conditions.  
i.  
that the grant will be spent upon that object within a reasonable time, if no time-limit has been fixed by the 
sanctioning authority; and  
ii.  
that any portion of the amount which is not ultimately required for expenditure upon that object will be surrendered. 
Audit scrutiny, when applied, should pay due attention to these points.  
 
31 
 
When recurring grants-in-aid are made to an institution it should as far as possible be verified in audit that the 
grantee continues to function as such institution, and that the circumstances in recognition of which the grant was 
sanctioned still continue to exist.  
 
All Institutions receiving grants-in-aid from Government should maintain in respect of each sanctioning authority 
separate registers called ―Register of Assets required wholly or substantially met out of Government Grants showing the 
particulars of all assets of permanent or semi-permanent nature like buildings, roads,· furniture, books, slates, etc., that 
are acquired wholly or substantially from Government grant together with the actual value of the assets and they should 
produce the register for verification at the time of audit.  
 
The above register is of permanent nature and should be maintained in the form given in Annexure-I to G.O.  Ms. 
No. 336, Finance, dated 28th March 1962 in respect of institutions other than Panchayat Union and Panchayats and in 
the form given in the Annexure to Memo. No. 93269/R.D.Accts.Spl/62-2, Rural Development and Local Administration, 
dated 16th April 1963 by the Panchayat and Panchayat Unions.  
Note:  
The assets of permanent nature will mean the immovable properties and the assets of semi-permanent nature 
will denote the movable property of capital nature where the value exceeds Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand only.)  
 
Any asset acquired wholly or substantially out of Government Grant and entered in this register should not, without 
the sanction of Government be disposed of or encumbered or utilised for purposes other than those for which the grants 
were originally sanctioned.  
 
Government have also ordered that from the existing assets all these assets that were wholly or substantially 
acquired out of Government grants should be sorted out and entered in the Register required to be maintained.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1494, Finance, dated 30th December 1960)  
(G.O. Ms. No. 336, Finance, dated 28th March 1962)  
(Memo. No. 93269/R.D. Acts.Spl/62-2, Rural Development and Local Administration, dated 16th April 1963)  
2.8. REPORTS ON DEFALCATION AND OTHER LOSSES  
 
On receipt of a report on defalcation or loss of the funds of Local Body, the audit department shall call for such 
further information as it may require on the subject and carefully examine the case and ascertain whether the defalcation 
or loss was rendered possible by any defect in the rules or whether it was due to non-observance of rules or want of 
supervision on the part of the administrative authorities. It should then report the result of such examination  to the 
authority competent and make out a paragraph in the audit report on the accounts of the local body for the relevant 
period. If the case is of a serious nature, a report should  be made to the    
2.9 PREPARATION OF AUDIT REPORTS 
 
It is essential to sort out the preliminary objections included by the auditor in the audit notes / objection statements, 
the relevant material information subsequently gathered by the auditor and replies, if any, received in compliance with 
the preliminary objections from the local bodies before preparing the audit report.  
 
It should be seen that the objections raised during the audit are properly arranged, classified under various 
categories as per the Instructions issued from time to time, as precise as possible and at the same time conveying the 
meaning which it is intended to convey.  
 
Drafting of Audit Report requires special skill in presenting the audit findings in a cogent, elegant and impersonal 
language avoiding such words as ‗Frauds‘ ‗Misappropriation‘ ‗Manipulation‘ ‗Moral turpitude‘, etc. To cultivate a good 
drafting style it requires lot of hard work in vigorously practicing the art of drafting, a good mastery and command over 
the language, a good vocabulary and above all a free flow of ideas oven in well arranged sequence.  
 
The following nine steps may be followed to bring out a quality report: 
 
i.  Comprehend what you are required to or what you want to report on  
 
ii. Ascertain all possible sources of information  
 
iii.  Decide upon what source to draw from  
 
iv. Gather information and explanations  
 
32 
 
v.  Sift and evidence  
 
vi.  Synthesize the acceptable evidence  
 
vii. Abstract what is to the point and throw the rest away  
 
viii. Throw what is left into report form  
 
ix. Summarise your findings.  
 
This to be remembered that the performance of the audit department is judged on the quality of the final report sent 
to the heads of institutions and Government.  
2.9.1) EDITING OF AUDIT REPORT  
 
Editing of an audit report is an exercise of approving the written script by a superior Auditor  over who scrutinises 
the matter as to the accuracy of the contents, manner, language and style of presentation of facts and carrying out 
modifications in part or whole wherever necessary.  
 
 
 
Editing of the audit reports involves the following processes:  
i.  
Going through the written matter (draft audit report) and satisfying as to the correctness of the contents and style of 
presentation;  
ii.  
Ensuring that the draft conveys properly the writers  intends and that the Person for whom it is meant understands 
it;  
iii. 
Ascertaining that the language used for expression of the matter is simple, lucid and grammatically correct;  
iv.  
After ascertaining the accuracy or otherwise of these three products the Auditor then goes to examine that the 
sequence of the various facts stated and sees that in respect of all stages from the introductory remarks to the 
drawing of conclusion,  the description is proper and that there are no glaring omissions.  
v.  
Thereafter the Auditor, proceeds to check the authenticity and aptness of the authorities quoted such as Sections of 
the Act, Government Orders and resolutions, etc.  
vi. 
Checks and crosschecks the interpretations derived in the matter and sees that these tally with the common 
established interpretations in vogue;  
vii.  See that the focal point made out in the report is proved beyond doubt to the best of ability of the writer;  
iii. 
Satisfies himself that the statement of facts mentioned in the report are from known reliable sources, are relevant to 
the subject and are not exaggerated, overstated or used out of context;  
ix. 
Satisfies himself that there is no scope for doubt, ambiguity or possibility of challenging the statement;  
x.  
Sees that due consideration and weightage is given to the explanation given by other party justifying their stand;  
xi.  
Sees that in case of disagreement the points at issues are argued properly to prove the stand taken by audit;  
xii.  Sees that a clear mention is made about the oral discussions, views for and against the decision or fact; 
xiii. Sees that the presentation is not one sided and the view point of the administration is not ridiculed;  
xiv. Sees that expressions are polite and are not aimed at any individuals to malign their reputation.  
xv.  Personal references, facts based on hear say should be avoided as far as possible.  
xvi. Cases of confused thinking and baseless allegations should be eliminated;  
xvii. Then the Editor gives finishing touches and makes last minute changes before giving clearance for publication.  
 
33 
 
The real test of good audit depends upon the Audit Report, Even if the audit of a very high standard is carried out, a 
poorly drafted report may spoil the impression. Audit Work and Audit Report make the overall image.  
 
In editing Audit Reports, the main thought should be on the correctness or otherwise of the objection raised by audit 
to point out the irregularities or the seriousness of the irregularity committed.  
 
Responsibility for the preparation and presentation of the final report is shared by the auditor who writes the report 
and the Audit Officer who approves the report.  
 
Serious irregularities are to be brought to the notice of the Heads of Institutions for taking further action. In cases of 
serious objections the audit has to  
i.  Specify the modus operandi;  
ii.  Offer comments on the failure or lack of supervision;  
iii.  Advice the authorities to make good the losses, and  
iv.  fix the responsibility and suggest action against those responsible.  
2.9.2) 
AUDIT COMMENT ON PERFORMANCE OF EACH SCHEME /  PROJECT:-  
 
Separate paragraph for each Scheme / project Commenting on the performance of the project should be included 
in the Audit Reports of the Institutions where schemes are implemented. The paragraph should be an analytical as well 
as a factual report and the paragraph should contain generally the following informations: 
i.  Name of the Scheme.  
ii.  The authority in which the scheme was sanctioned.  
iii.  Total estimated cost of the Scheme.  
iv.  The date or year of the commencement of the Scheme.  
v.  Source from which the Scheme was launched and extent of assistance.  
i.  Loan,  
ii.  Grant; and  
iii. From the own revenue of the institution,  
vi.  Amount spent up to the previous year-  
i.  Loan  
ii.  Grant  
iii. From the own revenue of the institution  
vii. Amount spent during the year under audit 
i.  Loan  
ii. Grant  
iii. From the own revenue of the institution.  
viii. Time limit, if any, fixed for the execution of the Scheme.  
ix.  Target, if any fixed.  
x. Whether there is any abnormal delay / progress at desired space.  
xi. Whether the Scheme is completed or in progress. if it is completed, date of completion and when the same has 
been handed over to the institution without delay by the agency for the execution.  
xii. If there is any delay in execution the causes for the delay.  
xiii. Whether there is abnormal variation between estimated cost and the completion report.  
xiv.  Whether the work is abandoned in the middle due to reasons beyond control.  
xv.  Nature of asset acquired.  
 
34 
xvi.  Whether it is put to beneficial use (i.e)  
i.  Bus-stand, shops, etc., constructed are leased out immediately after taken over.  
ii.  Water- supply and Drainage connections are given to number of houses as reported in the scheme proposed.  
 
In some cases, Bus-stands, shops, etc., constructed are handed over without forming road in bus stand or without 
electrifying the shops, etc., Consequently the assets acquired could not be leased out. Such things should also be 
commented in detail in the para. 
 
Tender irregularities, excess payment, irregularities in respect of issues of stores, etc., should be commented upon 
in a separate sub-para under the main objection 
 
Apart from individual para for each Scheme/Project, a general para on the drawal and utilisation of grants and loans 
during the year may be included in the report immediately after the para on the review of financial position of the 
Municipality. In this paragraph, the following information may be given.  
 
 
i. 
Nature and purpose of Grant / Loan  
ii. Reference to Government order sanctioning the grant loan.  
iii. Amount of Grant/Loan sanctioned/Carried out from previous year. 
iv. Amount utilised.      
        v. Balance left unutilised.  
(Director Circular RC. No. 33138 / C1 / 81, dated 9th April 1981) 
2.10.  
LEVY OF AUDIT FEES: 
 
Audit fees is levied by the LFAD for the audit of the Municipal Corporations and Municipalities (including Third  
Grade Municipalities) at  the rates mentioned below: 
S.No. 
Name of the Institution 
Rate of Audit fee 
Authority 
1 
   a)Municipal Corporation 
   b) Municipalities 
50% of the actual cost of  
Pay and Allowances 
including Traveling 
Allowances of the Audit staff 
and Deputy Director / Asst. 
Director 
G.O.Ms.No.62 Fin.(LF) 
Dept., dt 17.1.94 
(Examiner‘s 
Rc.No.38238/PA/95 
dt.31.5.95 
 
 
Audit fees is worked out for each institution immediately  on completion of audit  and necessary paragraph is 
incorporated in the Audit Report.  In respect of  Corporations and Municipalities wherein Concurrent Audit  is carried out, 
the audit fees for each financial year is worked out based on the expenditure statement and intimated to the   Executive 
Authority through a letter with a request to remit the audit fee immediately. 
          The audit fees should be remitted by the  concerned institutions to the following Government head of Account. 
 
 ―0070 – Other  Administrative  Services 
 
60 – Other Services – 110 – Fees for Government Audit 
 
AA – Fees for Government Audit – DPC  Code No.0070 –60 – 110- AA 0009‖ 
3. 
 AUDIT ACTIVITIES OF THE REGIONAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF  LOCAL FUND AUDIT: 
 
The  Regional Deputy Directors are entrusted with the overall  supervision and review  of the  audit  activities of the 
Assistant Director‘s office  in each district within their region, and incharge of settlement of audit objections, conducting of 
Joint sittings and  attending High Level Committees. 
 
 The  primary  duties  performed by RDDs are as follows: 
1. Review of  the audit functions of all ADs under their control. 
 
35 
2. Review of the monthly state of audit of all AD‘s offices. 
3. Approval of Annual calendar of  audit and quarterly  audit programme of audit staff of all AD‘s offices. 
4. To watch the timely commencement and completion of audit. 
3. To  watch the receipt of Audit Reports from AD‘s offices in respect of all auditable institutions. 
4. Approval of the Tour programme of all ADs under their control. 
5. Approval of monthly dairies and traveling allowance bills of ADs 
6. Issue of review remarks on Audit Reports. 
7. Issue of Special letters on the basis of audit paras relating to loss  / irregularities to the Executive Authorities  
concerned. 
8. Issue of  Special  Reports to the concerned administrative heads of the Departments. 
9. Settlement of pending objections relating to S/L & S/R in respect of Municipalities,  
Panchayat Union Councils,   Town Panchayats and Miscellaneous institutions. 
10. To attend  Joint  Sittings for settlement of objections in Municipalities and Panchayat Unions. 
11. To attend High level Committees for settlement of objections in Municipalities, Panchayat Union Councils  and 
Town Panchayats. 
12. To conduct monthly review meeting of ADs in their jurisdiction to  ascertain the State of audit. 
13. To report about Defalcation / misappropriation   if any  found during   audit in their region and to send  the audit 
paras of serious nature received from the ADs to the Director and to Regional and District Administrative 
Authorities. 
3.1)  REVIEW OF AUDIT REPORTS: 
 
The review of audit reports received from AD‘s offices is done in the RDD office as detailed below: 
         Municipal Audit Reports                                                    50% 
         Panchayat Union Councils   Audit Reports                       50% 
         Town Panchayat Audit Reports                                        25% 
  
Audit Reports subjected to review should be scrutinized  thoroughly in   RDDs office and the  areas for 
improvement in quality of audit  shall be  communicated   to the AD.  The copies of  such  review remarks issued should  
be sent to the Director‘s office. 
 
The receipt of replies to review remarks  from the Assistant Directors should be watched by the RDD. 
         (Director‘s  Circular No.30/08(Rc.No.MA4/47685/08) dt.29.10.08) 
         A Review Register should be maintained in the RDDs office for this purpose in the following format. 
S.No. 
Name of the 
Institution 
Date of 
receipt of AR in 
RDD’s 
office 
Date of 
Review 
Date of issue 
of Review  
Remarks 
Signature 
of RDD 
Date of receipt of 
replies to Review 
Remarks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2) ISSUE OF SPECIAL LETTERS   
 
(a) Audit Surcharge and Disallowance Rules in the Madras City Municipal Corporation Act, Madurai City Municipal 
Corporation Act, Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act and those issued 
under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act 1994 and the Tamil Nadu Public Libraries Act and Tamil Nadu Agricultural Market 
Committee  Act  require that the auditors should report to the local body or institution concerned any material impropriety 
or irregularity noticed in the accounts and any loss or waste of money or other property owned by or vested in the local 
body or institution caused by negligence or misconduct with the names of persons responsible for such loss.  Every 
material irregularity or impropriety and loss  should therefore be included in the audit report. The attention of the 
 
36 
executive authority should be invited to the particular item in the Audit Report where the irregularity has been  mentioned  
to and he should be requested to place the objection and his reply before the  Council and communicate its view to the 
audit department.  
 
  Audit objections of surchargeable nature  should  not be mentioned in the Audit notes but they should be  
mentioned in the Audit Report.  In respect of vouchers, the actual date of payment should be noted in the audit 
paragraph  for example  ―Voucher No. 120 / 1st December 1974‖ but not as ―Voucher‖ No. 120/12-74".  
 
 The person or person responsible for the irregularity or impropriety should at the same time be afforded an 
opportunity to rectify the defect. The executive authority of a local body or the members of a Council  are usually held 
responsible for illegal payments and losses. In G.O. No. 1424, L & M, dated the 30th April 1931 the Government 
reminded the President of Local bodies  and others exercising the function of sanction and disbursement on behalf of 
local bodies that they are  responsible  and  the plea that they were misled by or misguided  by subordinates  would be 
wholly inadmissible and that it was open to the local body or its president to take such disciplinary action as it or he 
thinks fit against the subordinate concerned.  
 
 
         The  important instructions is issue of Special letter and Special Reports are detailed below: 
1) 
A special letter shall be  issued by the Regional Deputy Director on behalf the Director of  Local   Fund Audit within 
one month from the date of receipt of Audit Report. 
 
The format for issue of  special letter has been prescribed and  communicated in Director‘s Circular 
Rc.No.56282/MA4/08 dt. 23.6.2009 .  It shall be issued to the Executive Authority who held the office during the period of 
audit  inviting his attention to the irregularities noticed in audit.  If the defect communicated to the Executive Authority is 
not rectified within a period of two months, action will be taken to issue a special report to the authority  competent for 
taking acttion after six months from the dateof issue of special letter.  A  copy of the special letter is also sent to the 
present Executive Authority  of the institutions to enable him to take action to rectify the defects pointed out in audit.   
2) 
The Cheques are to be signed by two Officers. One of them is the executive authority and the other is a responsible 
person specified in the government orders. The question as to whether special letters are to be issued to both the 
officers for purpose of surcharge action was discussed and it was decided that the officer who passes the bill for 
payment is to be held responsible for any irregularity or loss.  
3)  
The instructions issued in Director Circular H2/85490/80, dated 18th March 1981 will not apply to the special letter 
issued to non-officials to whom surcharge certificate is issued by the Director. In such cases, the existing Form of 
special letter with the Director of Local Fund Audit being noted in the From Address‖ and signed by the Regional 
Deputy Director as ―For Director of Local Fund Audit‖ should be used.  
(Item 7 of Director of LFA  letter No. Rc.No. A3/81130/79, dated 31st March -1980)   
.  
4) 
Great care should be taken in selecting paragraph for inclusion in the special letter. No objection that could 
eventually be brought under the Surcharge rules should be omitted. Items which cannot be pursued to the point of 
surcharge should strictly be eschewed. No objection should be carried forward from one year‘s special letter issued 
to a particular person to the special letter of a subsequent year issued to the same person. Action should be taken 
on an objection in a year‘s special letter, with reference to the specia1 letter for that year until the question of 
surcharge in regard to that objection is finally settled. The special letter should as a rule be sent by registered post 
and an acknowledgement obtained. A note should be made in the margin of the original audit report paragraph 
about the fact of issuing special letter. The closure of objections included in special letters should be reported to the 
administrative authorities by  Regional Deputy Director in  regard  to Municipalities and Panchayat Unions and  
Assistant Director in respect of Town Panchayats. 
(Vide  DLFA K. Dis H2/58925/75-2, dated 21st October 1975 as amended subsequently) 
      5)The time allowed for replies to special letters is  two months  as that allowed for replies to audit reports. By the time 
replies to the special letters are received, replies to audit reports and the views of the local body there on would 
also become available so as to enable audit either to pursue the objections to the point of surcharge or drop it. 
 
37 
6) 
If replies to a special letter are not received within the time allowed i.e., two months as the case may be, 
Regional Deputy Director may wait for six months. If replies are not received even after six months,  the 
disposal of the special letter should be taken up at once, on the materials already available. In G.O. Ms. No. 
1805, Local Administration, dated the 8th May 1939, the Government informed the Commissioner that special 
letters on audit reports should be promptly replied to within the time allowed and that failure in this regard will 
result in disciplinary action being taken against them. Reasonable time should be allowed to  the 
Commissioners / Executive Officers  or Special Officers to settle the objections if a request is received from 
them for extension of time on account of any peculiar difficulty.  
3.2.1.SELECTION OF SPECIAL LETTER  PARAS: 
1.    Only clear case of loss pointed out in  audit paras alone to be included in special letter. 
2. 
The monetary limit for inclusion of  objections in Special Letter is as follows: 
i) 
Municipal Corporations :   Objections involving  loss of Rs.25,000 and above 
ii) 
Municipalities                :   Objections involving  loss of Rs.5,000 and above 
iii) 
Other Institutions           :   Objections involving  loss of Rs.1,000 and above 
 
3. 
 Objections regarding advances paid to the executive authorities pending recovery / adjustment and amount due to 
be recovered under Miscellaneous revenue head from the executive authority shall be included. 
4. 
Objections relating to Establishment such as irregular pay fixation   need not be included in the special letter paras 
since there is  possibility for recovery from the staff concerned.   
5. 
Advances, taxes and fees which are time barred during the period under audit shall be included in the special letter.  
Further, the advances sanctioned and admitted by the executive authority which are pending recovery shall also be 
included in the special letter. 
6. 
Generally It should be ensured that there should not be  non production of records  by administration toaudit. .  
However, even after taking coercive steps to get the records for audit,  if the records still remain not-produced,  
objection should be raised in the Audit Report.  Such objection can be included in the special letter.  
7. 
Issue of cement and steel to contractors for which the cost  not recovered should be incorporated in the objections 
and included in  Special letter. 
8. 
Losses noticed due to shortage of stock of  cement, steel  shall also be pointed out in the  objection and included in 
the Special letter. (Dir‘s Circular No.40/08  Dt.5.12.2008 and  2/09 Dt.27.2.2009.) 
3.3.  ISSUE OF  SPECIAL REPORTS : 
 
Special Reports are issued by the  RDD‘s  of Local Fund Audit  in respect of  each individual Commissioner /  
Executive Officer who held  the  office of the  executive authority of an institutions  during the  period under  audit and 
who is  responsible for the loss or irregularity caused to the institution. 
 
The  special letter paras pending settlement  after  six months  from the date of its issue shall be grouped individual 
wise and a special  report prepared and sent to the concerned Head of the department for taking   action against the  
individual by whose negligence the loss was  caused to the institution. 
 
Special Reports are issued   by the  RDDs  to the respective administrative heads of local bodies in the prescribed 
format as follows: 
 
Institutions  
 
 
Report to be sent to  
 
1.    Municipalities 
 
 
Director of Municipal Administration, Chennai-5  
 
2.   Panchayat Union Councils  
Commissioner of Rural Development & Panchayat Raj,  Chennai-15 
 
3.  Town Panchayat  
 
Commissioner of Town Panchayat, Chennai-108. 
 
4.  Other Miscellaneous Institutions  
Respective HODs. 
 
38 
 
The administrative authorities may initiate disciplinary  action against the Commissioner / Executive Officer 
concerned for the pecuniary losses pointed out in the audit objections based on the special report sent by the audit 
department. 
                                G.O. Rt .No 16 .MAWS Dept., dt.18.1.99 
                                G.O. Rt. No.187 RD (P.6) Dept., dt.7.9.99 
                                G.O.Rt .No.2 MAWS Dept., dt.2.2.06 and G.O.Ms.No.83 MAWS dt 1.6.2009 
 
The  important instructions in issue of special letter and Special Reports are detailed below: 
 
In case, if special letter paras cannot be issued to an executive authority who  retired from service, the objections of 
serious nature and losses pointed out in the Audit Report shall be   sent to the Administrative Head of the Department for 
taking  action. 
 
A register showing the issue  of the Special Report  shall be maintained and separate pages shall be allotted for 
every local body institution.  The entries regarding addition and deletion of Special Report paras in the register shall be 
got attested by Regional Deputy Director. 
(Director of Local Fund Audit, Chennai Roc. No.54419 / EAA3/99-1 Dt.28-06-2000) 
 
The Regional Deputy Directors are authorised to sign the special letter and special reports to the executive 
authority on behalf of the Director and issue the same from the Regional Deputy Director‘s office. 
 
Note:  Instructions have been issued in Circular No.40/08 and 41/08 (Rc.No47685 ./ MA4/08 dt. 5.12.08) and 
Cicular No.2/9 dt.27.2.2009 of the Director  regarding issue of Special Letter / Special Report. The instructions should be 
scrupulously followed. 
3.4   SETTLEMENT OF OBJECTIONS: 
 
The  primary duty of the RDD is to give  importance to the settlement of pending objections. 
 
Settlement of objections is done  through joint sittings convened at  division / district level.  RDDs should  attend the  
joint sittings along with  the  administrative authorities viz., RDMA / District Collector and other officers for settlement of 
objections in respect of Municipalities and Panchayat Union Councils.  The correctness of the replies furnished and the 
genuineness of the recovery of loss / rectification of the defect point out in the objection has to be ascertained. The 
replies and  records in respect of each and every objection should be perused and  the  RDDs should satisfy  themselves 
that the loss incurred has been fully made good.  After ensuring  the  above  facts , the paras can be settled. 
 
The paras  included in  Special letter , Special Report and other  paras in Audit Report may be settled during  joint 
sittings.  The ADs should   assist the  RDDs in Joint sittings for verifying  the replies and records. Further remarks on the 
settlement of objections  should be issued immediately at the closure of the  joint sittings.  Delay in issue of  further 
remarks or issue of further remarks at a later date should be strictly avoided. 
 
RDDs should furnish the details  of number of paras settled each month institution wise in his monthly diary sent to 
the Director.  
 
The joint sittings for settlement of auditobjectionsin respectof Town Panchayats shall be attended by ASsistant 
Director.        
3.5 HIGH LEVEL COMMITTEES 
 
RDDs should attend the HLCs  for settlement of  audit  objections relating to  retired/ retiring officials of local bodies 
as and when convened by the  Member Secretary of the Committees at  district leve / Regional level.   The RDD is a 
Member in respect of High Level Committee for Panchayat Unions and Town Panchayats and Vice-chairman in respect 
of Municipalities. The Committee will take decision  to settle / effect suitable recovery in respect of each and every  audit  
para placed before the committee. 
 
On receipt of the proceedings of the committee necessary entries should be made in the Register of SL / SR 
regarding the orders of the committee. 
 
39 
 
In respect of paras wherein recoveries have been ordered by the HLC, a watch register should be maintained in the 
RDD‘s office  to watch  the action taken by the administration/ Executive Authority to  recover  the sum ordered by the 
Committee.  The administrative / Executive Authority should implement the orders of HLC. The   non-impelmentation of  
Committee‘s orders   on the part of the  administration should be brought to the notice of the  Committee  when the 
committee subsequently  meets as Action taken report.                                                                                                                                
3.6)  Approval of  Audit Programme: 
 
RDDs shall scrutinise and approve the annual calendar of audit  sent by the AD‘s .  The AD‘s shall   prepare  
quarterly audit programme    based on the calendar of audit  and send it  for approval to the RDDs in duplicate. 
 
The quarterly audit programme of each  AD‘s office should be thoroughly scrutinised and approved by the RDDs 
and a copy of the approved programme should be sent to the concerned ADs. 
 
RDDs should watch whether the audit programme is carried out by all ADs as per the approved programme. 
Deviations from the  approved programme should  be  got approved by RDD.  In unavoidable circumstances the 
deviation of audit programme may be ratified by RDD. 
 
 
3.7) GUIDING OF AUDIT STAFF: 
 
RDD‘s  should  visit  the O/o Assistant Directors under their control every month by rotation on the date of  staff  
meeting  and issue guidelines to the audit staff regarding  the improvement of the quality of audit.  RDD‘s should also 
conduct the meeting of all  Inspection in their region on quarterly/half yearly basis. (Director‘s circular No.26/08 
Rc.No.PA/47806/08 dt.29.10.08) 
Para . 4 :  AUDIT  FUNCTIONS  OF ASSISTANT  DIRECTORS:-  
 
The Assistant Directors are the heads of the audit at  the district / divisional  level.  Each  Division  in a  district has 
one Assistant Director  who is in charge of the audit activities of the institutions entrusted to him.  He is solely responsible 
for all the matters relating to the  audit of  the institutions under his control. 
 4.1  MAIN FUNCTIONS: 
 
The Assistant Directors of each division is in charge of the  audit functions of the field as well as  of the concurrent 
staff placed at his disposal.  The AD should lead the audit party for the audit of Municipalities.  Assistant Directors can 
take up the audit of ULBs  except Grade –I and II Town Panchayat either individually or along with the audit staff. When 
there aremore than one Assistant Director in a District  the  senior most Assistant Director is responsible for the 
administration of office. 
4.2  AUDIT PROGRAMME:  
 
The Assistant Directors of each division should prepare the annual calendar of audit of the staff under their division 
for the  audit of ULBs and  as well as   the  concurrent audit of  Municipalities & Panchayat Union Councils.  The 
consolidated audit programme should be sent to the concerned Regional Deputy Director for approval.  
 
Based on the approved calendar of audit the Assistant Directors should prepare quarterly programme in 
consultation with the heads  of the audit parties and submit it  to the RDD.  After approval of the quarterly programme by 
RDD, the ADs should draw the monthly programme  and communicate the same to each audit party. 
4.3 GUIDING THE AUDIT STAFF:  
 
The Assistant Directors should guide the auditors under their control so as to enable them to carry out the audit 
work. 
 
The Assistant Director should visit each and every institution during the commencement of audit and  hold 
discussions with the audit party about the areas to be covered in audit. Similarly during the completion of audit,  the 
ADs should visit the institution and review the audit work so far done and help the audit party to complete the audit . 
 
40 
 
ADs should also visit the institution in which audit is in progress periodically and ascertain the audit work completed 
so far and the remaining  work to be completed.  He should thus guide the audit party to  complete the audit in time. 
           The   ADs should carry out the original audit of  major work vouchers and expenditure on various schemes in 
ULBs along with the  audit parties.  The areas to be audited by the AD should be identified in each institution and audit 
taken up by the AD accordingly.  The  Audit Reports should contain the docket sheet in which the   details of  mandays 
availed by the A.D.  and staff   should be noted.   
             ADs should also hold discussions with the Executive Authorities regarding the progress of audit periodically to  
enable the  smooth conduct and completion of audit by the audit parties.  The difficulties faced by the audit parties should 
be brought to the notice of the Executive Authority during the discussion.  The  draft audit paras should also be made 
known to the Executive Authority during the periodical discussion to help the administration to rectify the defects  pointed 
out immediately. 
             ADs should send the audit completion report of each institution to the RDD on the day of completion of audit by 
the audit party. 
 
 
4.4  WATCHING OF STAFF DIARY:    
 
ADs should obtain fortnightly diaries from the audit staff and review the same to have an  overall view  of the work 
done by each auditor.  The work done and the  balance work to be done are to be  evaluated  by the AD.  The  mandays 
availed by  each auditor  should also be scrutinised. 
4.5  COMMUNICATING  OF PARAS OF SERIOUS NATURE: 
 
ADs    should submit at least two audit paras of serious nature  noticed during the  current month‘s audit every 
month to the Director of Local Fund Audit   through the RDD. 
(Director Circular No.32/08 (Rc.No.MA4/35290/08 dt.29.10.08) 
4.6  ISSUE OF AUDIT REPORTS: 
 
ADs should ensure that the draft audit reports are submitted by the audit parties in time without  delay.  ADs should 
scrutinise the draft audit report within 3 days after receipt of the same from the audit parties and point out the defects or 
items to be included/ excluded and after due rectification the AD should approve the audit reports and issue them without  
delay.  The copies of Audit Reports should be sent to RDD/ Director and to the administrative heads  without fail. The  
A.D. should  ensure that the objections raised in the audit slips have been included in the Audit Report  without fail. 
Note: Instructions issued  regarding  the duties of Assistant Directors during review  of audit and approval of draft audit 
reports have been issued and  check slip also have been prescribed in Director‘s Circular No.36/08 
(Rc.No.TP3/47332/08 )dt.29.10.08  have to be followed. 
4.7. SETTLEMENT OF OBJECTION: 
 
The Assistant Director shall attend the Joint sittings for settlement of pending objections in Municipalities and PUC 
along with the RDD.  ADs shall conduct joint sittings for  settlement of pending objections in Town Panchayats. The 
further remarks on all replies  received for the objections should be issued immediately after the conclusion of the Joint 
Sitting on that day itself. 
4.8  TOUR PROGRAMME AND DIARY: 
 
Assistant Directors should submit their  monthly tour programme and diary to the RDD concerned for approval.  The 
Assistant Director I should chart out his tour programme without affecting  the administrative work.   Assistant Director-I 
should compulsorily  attend office on every monday and carryout audit and review work on the other days of week. the 
other assistant directors should carry out the tour programme through out the month.  
4.9  CONDUCT OF STAFF MEETING: 
 
41 
 
Assistant Directors  should conduct monthly staff meeting of all the staff under their control to assess the position of 
audit of all institutions  where audit is the progress.  The views of the staff should be heard and the audit programme 
charted out based on the discussions held.  The G.Os & Circulars received during the month should be made known to 
the staff during the meeting.  The minutes of the staff  meeting  shall be maintained at the office.  A copy  of the  minutes 
should be sent to the RDD every month. 
(Director Circular No.26/08 Rc.No.PA/47806/08 dt.29.10.08) 
4.10  MONTHLY REVIEW BY RDDS: 
 
All ADs should attend the monthly meeting conducted by the RDDs to have an assessment of the audit position of 
each district and appraise  the RDD about the present state of audit of their district.  The RDD‘s  are requested to  send a 
copy of the minutes of the A.D‘s meeting to H.O. every  month. 
4.11   REPORTING OF DEFALCATIONS:  All ADs should report the details of misappropriation or defalcations 
unearthed  by the audit parties during the audit to the Director of LF Audit through the RDD without any failure through 
D.O.letter / fax.  The A.D‘s should issue an audit slip immediately and take the objection to the notice of the RDMA /  
District Collector, A.D. Town panchayats etc. without fail. The ADs should assess the magnitude  of the misappropriation/ 
defalcation and thoroughly   analyse and submit a full fledged report.  
(Director‘s Circular No.33/08(Rc.No.MA4/47685/08) dt.29.10.08)(Director Circular No.22/08 (Rc.No.TP1/29897/08) 
dt.31.7.08) 
 
 
4.12  WATCHING OF RECEIPT OF ANNUAL ACCOUNTS AND TOWN PANCHAYAT, VOUCHERS: 
 
it is the primary duty of the ads to have a watch over the receipt of annual accounts of all institutions / vouchers of 
town panchayats  whose audit is under their control on  the due dates.  
 
ADs can inspect the institution which have not submitted the annual accounts  and vouchers in time and hold 
discussions with the executive authority  and insist upon them to compile and send the accounts/ vouchers  without 
further delay.  A check slip in this regard have been prescribed in Director‘s Circular No.36/08 (Rc.No.TP347332/08) 
dt.29.10.08.  ADs should carryout the   inspection as per the check slip. Non compliance if any by the EAs should be 
brought to the notice of the Director through RDD by D.O. letter. The A.Ds should sign the acknowlegement  for receipt 
of annual accounts / Town Panchayat vouchers themselves  and send to the executive authority. 
(Director‘s Circular No.31/08 (Rc.No.MA4/47685/0-8) dt.29.10.08) 
4.13 REPLIES TO REVIEW REMARKS ON AUDIT REPORTS:  
 
The ADs should furnish their replies to the review remarks  issued by the Director/ RDD on the audit reports within 
one month from the date or receipt of review remarks in ADs office. 
5. 
AUDIT   IN THE O/O THE ASSISTANT  DIRECTORS OF LF AUDIT. 
5.1  A)AUDIT OF VOUCHERS OF LOCAL BODIES 
 
The Panchayat Union Councils and Municipal Councils retain the paid vouchers in their own offices where they are 
audited. They send an abstract of the monthly accounts to the office of the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit.  
 
In the case of Panchayat Union, the daily sheet of transaction in the prescribed forms relating to  Panchayat Union 
General Fund and Education Fund are to be sent to reach the concurrent Inspector‘s unit as  Panchayat Union Office on 
the 3rd day of the transaction. Their receipts are watched through a watch register and the returns so received are 
checked in the Inspector office.  
B) 
 AUDIT OF TOWN PANCHAYAT VOUCHERS IN THE OFFICE OF THE  ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF LOCAL 
FUND AUDIT : 
 
The audit of all institutions are generally conducted locally in the ‗institutions concerned‘. In the case of  Town 
panchayats, however, the paid vouchers are received every month in the audit office and their audit is conducted with 
reference to available particulars subject to local verification during local audit.  
 
42 
 
The monthly full scale audit of the accounts of Town Panchayats is done by this department from 1st April 1956. 
The following procedure has been prescribed for the transmission of vouchers and accounts to the office of the Assistant 
Director of Local Fund Audit by the Town Panchayats: 
 
The paid vouchers for each month along with the monthly Trial Balance and the Demand, Collection Balance 
Statement in one batch with a list of payments detailing voucher numbers in serial order and amounts so as to reach the 
respective Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit Office not later than 25th of the month following.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1618, Rural Development and Local Administration, Dept., dated 30th June 1966.)  
ii. 
The following documents should be sent by Town Panchayats to audit offices in addition to the paid vouchers and 
the monthly accounts with the Demand, Collection and Balance Statement;-  
a. Copies of proceedings, memoranda etc., relating to appointments, leave, punishments and transfers of 
establishments, copies of sanctioned increment certificates, etc., (to be attached to the relevant bank payment 
voucher wherever possible.)  
b. Copies of sanctioned estimates for works, memoranda of contract rates, completion reports, etc.,  
c. Copies of proceeding of meetings of Town Panchayats and sanctioned budget estimates. (G.O. Ms. No. 1326, 
Local Administration Dept.,  dated, 11th September 1956.)  
 
C) 
Voucher Audit:  
 
Usually all vouchers received are accompanied by a covering list. The correctness  of the vouchers received should 
be checked by the Record Clerk but he should not himself sign the acknowledgement. He should put up the 
acknowledgement to the Assistant Director. Immediately on receipt of vouchers, a docket should be attached to the 
voucher bundle of a month in the following form. One docket should be attached separately for each month.  
 
 
 
Name of the Institution   
 
 
 
 
 
Month 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         From 
 
         To 
 
Serial Number of Vouchers  
 
Date of receipt of vouchers, Date of initials of Record Clerk  
 
Date of handing over for voucher audit with name of  
 
Assistant Inspector.  
 
Dated initials of Assistant Inspector.  
 
Date of return to Record Clerk.  
 
Date initials of Record Clerk.  
 
Date of handing over for local audit with the name of the auditor.  
 
Dated initials of Assistant Inspector / Deputy Inspector 
 
Date of return after annual audit / initials of Auditor.  
Initials of Record Clerk.  
 
The vouchers for each month should neatly tagged at the left hand top corner and tag tied. The vouchers should be 
in the custody of the Record Clerk at all times except when taken for local audit and if at all any vouchers is taken out, a 
slip should be inserted indicating when and by whom the voucher was taken and its final restoration watched.  
 
43 
 
Immediately on receipt of vouchers it should be verified whether monthly Trial Balance have been received along 
with the Demand, Collection and Balance Statement. If not reminder should be issued. The monthly Trial Balance should 
be kept along with each month‘s vouchers. While receiving the vouchers, the Record Clerk should see whether all work 
vouchers are accompanied with the questionnaire prescribed in Circular No. 14274/78/GI, dated 16th March 1978 of 
Director. 
  
The only way to make the Executive Officers to submit Bank Payment vouchers to Audit Office in a complete form 
is to raise objection in the Monthly Audit Notes and follow it up by a special letter to the Executive Officer and in case of 
his failure to rectify the defects by reporting the fact to the District Town Panchayat Officer. Slackness on the part of audit 
in this respect results in vouchers being sent in complete and in perfect manner and affects the efficiency of audit. Hence 
the first objection in the Monthly Audit Notes should be:-  
i.  Omission to note the head of debit in vouchers.  
ii.  Omission to furnish particulars of voucher number working out to each item of expenditure in the monthly 
account itself.  
iii.  Omission to note sanction authority, furnish certificate, etc.  
iv.  Omission to note reference to stock book page number and furnish particulars of quotations called for and 
lowest accepted.  
v.  Omission to attach copies of sanction orders.  
vi.  Omission to attach copies of estimates etc., to work vouchers, and so on, according to the general defects 
noticed.  
vii. All vouchers upto Rs.25000/- shall be reviewed by the Inspector.  All vouchers exceed Rs.25,000/- shall alone 
by reviewed by the Assistant Director. 
viii. If any irregularity is pointed out by the Inspector during Local Audit in the office it  shall be thoroughly checked 
and reviewed by the Assistant Director immediately. 
ix. Any omission or irregularity in voucher Audit is pointed out subsequently during Local Audit, the Auditor and 
Review Authorities are jointly and severally responsible for such omission. 
 
All registers and records to be seen in local audit should be clearly noted in the front side of the Bank payment 
voucher itself prominently under the letters ―L.A‖.  
 
Each auditor should audit not less than 150 vouchers per day. The vouchers should be selected by examining the 
nature of expenditure,  amount spent in the voucher etc., The amount involved in the vouchers in the month should be 
tallied with the total amount of the list of vouchers enclosed along with the voucher bundle and also with the abstract of 
monthly Trial Balance and also with Bank Statement. Necessary objections regarding extraordinary expenditure, 
purchase in excess of actual requirement, payments of huge advances, expenditures which are not covered with proper 
sanction etc., should be commented upon in the Audit Notes.  
 
Bank Payment Voucher audit in the office should be  a complete audit of calculations, periodicity, admissibility, 
sanctions, acquittances and supporting documents. Local audit should normally be a verification of stock accounts, 
Measurement Books, Service Registers and such other records kept in Town Panchayat so far as expenditure side is 
concerned. Bank Payment Voucher audit should therefore be a detailed one.  
 
Objections raised in Bank payment voucher audit should be noted in the reverse of the voucher itself and written in 
ink and not in audit pencil. The Assistant inspector, Deputy Inspector should put his dated initials there under. The 
Inspector reviewing the voucher should initial underneath this. This item number of the Audit Notes in which the objection 
is included should be noted and ringed off to indicate that the objection has been incorporated in the Audit Notes. An 
abstract of objections should be maintained .  
 
As soon as the Bank Payment voucher audit is completed the Assistant Inspector/  Deputy Inspector should 
intimate the fact to the Inspector and place all the audited vouchers with review registers for review.  
 
44 
 
The review by Inspector includes general scrutiny of all Bank Payment vouchers and the correctness of the 
objections raised therein. Every voucher should be initialed in token of review.  
 
On receipt for the reviewed Bank Payment vouchers and registers back, the Assistant Inspector, Deputy Inspector 
will copy down all objections in the audit notes noting  relevant  item number in the audit notes and explain the omissions 
in the review register itself. He will then return the vouchers to the record clerk and see that the record Clerk initials in the 
docket and then put up the Audit Notes  with the review Register to the Inspector for approval and issue.  
           
In order to ensure the efficiency and continuity of audit of Town Panchayat Vouchers for each financial year and 
its review by the Inspector systematically, the following instructions should be followed.  
 
Each touring party headed by Inspector should be allotted the audit of Town Panchayat voucher  and review. The 
work should be distributed  by the Heads of audit parties to Assistant Inspector / Deputy Inspector attached to them. The 
audit should be conducted in the audit office whenever the Assistant Inspector, Deputy Inspector returns from camp and 
in no case not later than the following month in which the vouchers have been received. The audited vouchers should be 
placed along with review register before Inspector to whom the Assistant Inspector, Deputy Inspector is attached for 
review.  
 
The Inspector should review the audited vouchers of Panchayats done by  Assistant Inspector,  Deputy Inspector. 
Omissions if any noticed during the review should be indicated in the review register. After such review and rectification 
of the omissions pointed out, the Inspector should arrange to have the audit notes written up for the period of voucher 
audit conducted and hand them over to office for issue.  
 
 
 
A review register should be maintained by the head of each audit party in the form given at the end of this 
paragraph to check the details Bank Payment of voucher audit.  
 
The review register is subject to scrutiny monthly by the Assistant Director. The Assistant Director should test check 
the review done by the Deputy Inspector/Inspector.  
(Director Rc. No. 58836/90/E4fdated 3-8-1990 and 72959/E4/90 dated, 30-11 -1990)  
5.2) REVIEW REGISTER  
Voucher number 
and particulars 
Remarks by Inspector 
Deputy Inspector 
Explanation by the 
Asst. Inspector 
Final orders by 
Inspector/Deputy 
Inspector 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
Note:  
Separate pages should be allotted for each Panchayat.  
 
Omissions to raise objections should be referred to in the review vouchers apart from such objections being raised 
on the Bank Payment voucher.  
 
The auditors doing local audit should put their full signature neatly with dates in the registers audited by them 
instead of initialing.  
(Director‘s Circular Roc.No.C4/40715-1 / dt.19th July 1975) 
 
Audit Procedure (Town Panchayat): Before the audit is taken up, the auditor should thoroughly acquaint himself 
with the Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act, 1999 and the District Municipality Act 1920 and rules framed there under and 
executive instructions issued by Government and District Collectors and the Director of Town Panchayats. 
(Director of Local Fund Audit  Lr.No.4647 / T.Pt.3 / 2008  dated 14-7-2008) 
5.3) CHECK OF VOUCHERS (GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS):  
 
45 
 
i  
that Bank Payment vouchers in the proper printed form are available in support of expenditure and that the 
vouchers are numbered serially.  
 
ii.  that details of works noted and the totals are  entered in words as well as in figures;  
 
iii. that the bills have been passed by the authority empowered in this behalf;  
 
iv.  that the mode of payment ‗paid by cheque number‘ or ‗paid by adjustment‘ has been noted on the voucher;  
 
v. that there are no erasures and that any alterations in the total are attested by the Officer concerned as many 
times as they are made;  
 
vi. that stamped acknowledgements, wherever necessary, are available in support of payments;  and that 
acknowledgements by marks are duly attested by witnesses:  
 
vii.  that instructions given in the forms have been observed;  
 
viii. that no payment is made on a voucher or order signed by a clerk instead of the head of an office or on a 
voucher signed with a stamp and that copies of sanctions are certified by the sanctioning officer or by an officer 
authorised to sign for him;   
ix. that the classification of every voucher is correct; 
 
 
 
In addition, the following guidelines are issued  
 
The voucher No. and amount noted against each Bank Payment voucher in the covering list accompanied  by the 
vouchers should be traced out with reference to Bank Payment vouchers and gross amount debited in the Bank Payment 
voucher. The column ―Amount‖ in the covering list should be totaled and tallied with the total expenditure booked in the 
monthly account. If the amount booked in the monthly account is more than the total struck in the covering list, it is to be 
construed that certain vouchers have not been transmitted to audit Office. This should be viewed seriously because there 
may be booking of false expenditure without Bank Payment vouchers to screen defalcation. If the amount booked in the 
monthly account is less than the total struck in the covering list, it is to be construed that the closing balance arrived at in 
the monthly account has not been tallied with the Day Book. There may be some serious financial irregularities involved. 
Hence tracing of Bank Payment voucher No. and amount in the covering list with reference to voucher is more important 
duty of the auditor who conducts the voucher audit. The authority who reviews the audited vouchers should also give top 
priority for this check. The difference, if any, should be immediately brought to the notice of the Executive Officer and 
Assistant Director of Town Panchayats for immediate reconciliation 
5.4  AUDIT OF TOWN PANCHAYAT BILLS 
 
(i) 
AUDIT OF ESTABLISHMENT VOUCHERS 
 
The following are the important general checks that should be applied in the case of establishment bills of Town 
Panchayats: 
i.  that the amount drawn in the bill is arithmetically correct and supported by necessary certificates printed on the 
bill;  
ii. that the pay and allowances claimed for each individuals are according to the sanctioned scales of pay and at 
the rates admissible in his case and in accordance with rules regulating the conditions of service;  
iii.  that the pay claimed is admissible in respect of post to which the incumbent has been duly appointed and of 
which he is actually incharge;  
iv.  that no claim is ‗admitted for service in a post not duly sanctioned or for pay not assigned or provided for the 
post held;  
 
46 
v.  that an increment certificate is attached to the first pay bill in which a periodical increment is drawn;  
vi. (a) that in the case of an Officer or Servant lent  by Government to a Town Panchayat or transferred to it from 
any other local body the first pay after such loan or transfer is drawn only after the receipt of last pay certificate 
in the proper form granted by the head of the former office.  
 
(b) that the loan or transfer of service is in accordance with the rules, that joining time taken is correct and 
transit pay drawn is admissible and correctly allocated and that the allocation of leave and leave allowances 
between the different bodies has been correctly made;  
 
Note:  In cases where pensionary contribution is to be paid by the local body, a suitable note should always be kept 
to see that such contributions are credited and at proper rates by the local body.  
 
vii. that pay, leave salary, allowances and pension of a deceased officer are drawn only upto and inclusive of the 
date of his death;  
 
viii. that the grant of leave and the payment of leave salary are correct according to the rules:  
 
Note:  The District Collectors and the Director of Town Panchayats have been authorised to pass final order 
regarding the grant of leave under Fundamental Rule 86 to Panchayat Clerks beyond the date of compulsory 
retirement.  
 
ix.  that pay, leave salary and  other  allowances are distinctly shown;  
 
x.  that in cases where officiating promotion have been given they are admissible with reference to orders of 
Government or the rules relating thereto;  
 
xi.  that cases of appointments for the first time to posts in the services of Town Panchayats are supported by the 
production of a certificate of age, health, and vaccination except in cases where the production of such 
certificate has been dispensed with and that the certificate is attached to the first pay bill.  
 
xii.  that the employment of retired persons under Town Panchayat is covered by sanction of the District Collector 
and the Director of Town Panchayats that the said sanction is not for a period of  over one year at a time in 
each case and that the persons employed are in no case over 60 years of age;  
 
xiii. that arrear pay, etc., is drawn on a separate bill with a narration of the bill in which the charge was omitted or 
withheld or in which it was refunded by deduction.  
 
Note: The original bills should be verified and the number and amount of the subsequent Bank Payment voucher 
should be noted against the entry in the original bill.  
 
xiv. that in cases where the strength, (designation and grades of salaries of an establishment have been fixed, 
alterations therein are not made without competent sanction;  
 
xv.  that the conveyance allowance claimed is supported by competent sanction and is admissible and that a 
certificate of the actual maintenance of the conveyance in good condition and use by the person for the period 
of claim is attached;  
 
Note:  
Conveyance allowance being a form of traveling allowance cannot ordinarily be drawn during leave or 
vacation. But an employee while on leave is eligible for the payment of the conveyance allowance attached to the 
post in the cases where he maintains a live animal.  
 
xvi. that payments due to a deceased officer are not made except on the production of an authority of the nature 
specified in Clause (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) of the sub section (I) of section 214 of the Indian Succession Act 1925.  
 
i.  above Rs.25 under the orders of the Director of Town Panchayats on the execution of an indemnity Bond with 
such security or securities as he may require, if he is satisfied, after such enquiry as he may consider sufficient, 
about the right and title of the claimant and considers that undue delay and hardship would be caused by 
insisting on the production of such authority.  
 
xvii. that the bills are signed and passed by the Executive Authority;  
 
47 
 
xviii. that the amount of salary and allowances drawn is under no circumstances be kept under deposit;  
 
xix. that fixed traveling allowance is drawn along with pay, that it is according to the rate sanctioned  for the post 
and that a certificate from the controlling officer is appended to the bill to the effect that in respect of claims for 
fixed traveling allowance drawn in previous months, half-year or year as the case may be, he has obtained the 
necessary Journals and has satisfied himself that the employees concerned made the requisite tours and that in 
cases where the requisite tours were not made, the necessary recoveries have been effected in the bills (to be 
specified). 
 
xx.  that a claim of an officer or servant of a Town Panchayat for arrears of pay and allowances or increment of pay 
which has been allowed to remain in abeyance, has before payment been investigated by the Executive 
Authority.  
 
 
a. with the sanction of the Town Panchayat in the case of claims relating to a period exceeding six months but 
not exceeding two years; and  
 
 
b. with the sanction of the Town Panchayat and of the Assistant Director of Town Panchayat in the case of 
claims relating to a period exceeding two years.  
 
2. The payment of an arrears claim ordered under Rule -I shall not exceed the amount found to be actually due 
under the claim in respect of a period of one year immediately preceding the date of detection of the 
underpayment. If, in any particular case, it is considered that for special reasons a larger concession should be 
granted the Executive Authority shall consult the Director of Local Fund Audit in the first instance and then 
obtain, (if the Director of Local Fund Audit has so advised) the sanction of the Assistant Director Town 
Panchayat Officer for payments of arrears for a period exceeding one year;  
 
 
                      Provided that consultation with the Director of Local Fund Audit shall not be necessary in respect of arrears 
claims upto Rs.100/- which are over one year old but not more than three years old. For the purpose of this rule, the date 
of detection of an under-payment shall be the date on which the under-payment is detected by or brought to the notice of 
the Executive Authority or, if it is first detected in audit, the date of detection by the Audit Department. An arrear claim 
resulting from an order issued with retrospective effect does not arise until the order is issued and shall not, therefore be 
treated as a claim allowed to remain in abeyance during the period prior to the date of the order. An order passed with 
retrospective effect shall for the purposes of this note, be deemed to be one which in the circumstances of the case, 
could not have been passed earlier or which was deliberately held over pending consideration.  
(G.O.No.20S5, Local Administration, Dept., dated 12th October 1953.)  
(G.O.Ms.No.1254, Rural Development and Local Administration, Dept., dated 19th July 1969.)  
 
xxi. that in respect of posts for which qualifications have been prescribed, a certificate that the persons holding the 
posts are duly qualified or have been exempted by competent authority is furnished in the bill;  
 
xxii.that in the case of temporary posts, the sanction of the competent authority for the creation of the posts is forth 
coming and that the pay, allowances, etc., claimed are according to the sanctioned rate and according to the 
rules;  
 
xxiii .that subscription towards Provident Fund are deducted according to the rules and credited to ―T. Deposits‖ 
Accounts of the Town Panchayat maintained in the Government Treasury;  
 
xxiv. that other deductions made, if any, such as those towards repayment of advance for the purchase of 
conveyance, security deposits and recoveries of excess payment, General Provident Fund, etc., are properly 
credited to the respective accounts.  
 
 Increment Certificates: Increment certificates attached to establishment bills should be examined so that it may 
be verified that the increments claimed are according to rule and supported by facts stated and have actually accrued. 
The reasons why the increment is considered to be due as stated in the increment certificate should be examined.  
 
 Arrears and Advance Bills: Arrear bills should be audited wherever necessary with reference to the original bills 
for the months concerned.  
 
48 
  
Time Scale of  Pay: On the introduction of a time-scale of pay in an establishment, it is of vital importance to 
scrutinise the fixation of the initial rate of pay and the date of next increment for each member borne on that 
establishment.  
 
It depends upon the correctness of pay to be drawn year after year, until the officer or servant reaches the 
maximum of the time-scale. The head of the office should be required to submit to the Audit office a detailed statement 
showing the fixation of initial pay of each member of the establishment. Where the initial rates of pay are dependent to 
any extent or service, they can be checked only with the service books which are with the head of office. This work can 
therefore be best done at the local inspections or by calling for the Service registers from the heads of Offices for being 
checked in the Office of the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit. In any case, the whole or a large percentage of the 
initial rates and the dates of next increment must be checked.  
 Audit of travelling allowance 
 
General Instructions:  Before the audit is taken up, the auditor should study the rules governing the traveling 
allowance to the President, Vice-President, and members, etc., of Panchayats. 
 
Audit Checks: The following important checks should be exercised in the audit of traveling bills:-  
i.  that the pay of the incumbent as shown in the traveling allowance bills is correct with reference to the pay as 
shown in the pay bill.  
ii.  that the railway fare claimed is correct as verified with the Railway time-table.  
iii.  that the claims for daily allowance, mileage and cost of transport of personal effects are correct with reference 
to rules;  
iv.  that the certificates required by the rules in support of the claim for railway fare, mileage and transport of 
personal effects are furnished;  
v.  that the bills bear the counter signature of the competent authority wherever necessary;  
vi.  that the traveling allowance of Presidents, Vice-Presidents and non-official members of the Town Panchayat are 
correct with reference to the rules issued by Government;  
vii.  that the sanction of the competent authority is forthcoming for journeys outside the jurisdiction of the Panchayat 
in respect of Officers and Servants of Town Panchayat; and  
Note: 
Payment of traveling allowance to an officer or servant of a Town Panchayat (including the Executive Officer) 
for a Journey performed by him outside the jurisdiction of such Town Panchayat shall be treated as ordinary expenditure 
and met out of the funds of the Town  Panchayat concerned. Such officer or servant should obtain previous permission 
of the Assistant Director of Town Panchayat  concerned before undertaking the journey.  
(G.O.No.2347-Local Administration, Dept., dated 8th December 1951)  
ix. that the sanction of the competent authority is forthcoming in the case of grant of traveling allowance in excess 
of that admissible to Government Servants of similar standing and status.  
Note : 1. No claim for traveling allowances shall be entertained if it is made after three months from the date of 
completion of the journey to which it relates. Counter-signing Officers shall refuse to Counter Sign Bills presented after 
three months from the date of completion of the journey for which the traveling allowances claimed.  
5.5)  AUDIT OF CONTINGENT VOUCHERS 
 
The responsibility for the effective control of contingent expenditure rests primarily upon the heads of offices. Audit 
officers merely examine the fulfillment of that responsibility by their audit of such expenditure, the extent of which varies 
with the different classes of contingent charges. The main checks that should be exercised in the audit of contingent 
expenditure are the following: 
i. 
The expenditure is a proper charge and it is covered by budget allotment;  
ii.  It has received such sanction as is necessary;  
 
49 
iii.  It has been incurred by the Officer competent to incur it;  
iv.  Payments to suppliers of article such is medicine, stationery, furniture, etc., are supported by payees‘ receipts 
stamped wherever necessary. The actual receipt of the articles paid for and their entry in the respective stock 
accounts have been certified to by the drawing officer;  
v.  The rates allowed are apparently not extravagant;  
vi.  The bill is in the proper form and the classification is correctly recorded;  
vii.  a. Competitive tenders or quotations have been invited as required by the rules for supply of all articles required 
for the whole year and the lowest tender or quotation is accepted, reasons being recorded where lowest tender 
or quotation has not been accepted.  
 
b. An agreement wherever necessary has been obtained from the suppliers for the due fulfillment of the 
contract;  
 
c.  The articles paid for are at accepted rates;  
 
viii. The flow of expenditure is not too rapid;  
ix.  If the expenditure in the month of March is usually large, it should be verified whether it does not lead to 
wasteful or unnecessary expenditure or other irregularities;  
x.  Charges for which scales have been laid down are passed in accordance with the Scales;  
xi.  All sub-vouchers in support of payments are forthcoming;  
xii.  Bills in excess of Rs.1000/- have to be countersigned by the Assistant Director of Town Panchayat; 
xiii. To the recurring charges such as house-rent, rates, taxes, etc., necessary sanction is forthcoming;  
xiv. The totals of the various sub-vouchers attached to a bill agree with the total of the bill paid for;  
xv.  Law charges, Pleader‘s fees etc., are paid at sanctioned rates; and with appropriate sanction;  
xvi. The following are the important checks to be exercised in the audit of printing bills;  
 
a. that competitive tenders have been invited, the sanction of the Panchayat obtained for the selection of the 
tender accepted and that a record of the accepted rates of tenders has been made in the proceedings of the 
meeting at which the tender was accepted;  
 
b. that the tenderer has not quoted extravagant rates and in cases where the advice of the Director of Stationery 
and Printing, has been taken under G.0.2829, L..M, dated 15th July 1930, as regards the rates and  his advice 
has been taken into consideration before the acceptance of the tender.  
 
c. that an agreement has been taken from the printer with Security Deposit for the due fulfillment of the contract;  
 
d.  that in cases where only one tender has been received it should be wherever possible be seen that the 
printer has not tendered widely divergent rates without sufficient jurisdiction from these obtaining in other local 
bodies in the district and that there is no tendency to quote higher rates in respect of items usually done for local 
bodies;  
 
e. that forms available for sale at the Government Press or at the Central Press at Madras are not bought at the 
local presses;  
 
f.  that as far as possible and in the interest of economy tenders of local presses for printing work for other than 
account and other forms available at the Central and Government presses have been accepted instead of those 
outside persons unless the latter quotes decidedly lower rates;  
 
50 
 
g.  that the printer is not paid for the  Paper supplied by him at rates abnormally higher than the accepted tender 
rates of the stationery contractor and that where paper is supplied to the printer, a proper account for the paper 
used is attached to the printing bill;  
  
Periodical charges are sometimes drawn along with salary in one bill and in such cases it may be convenient to 
record the audit of both charges in the same place but when this is done, budget check must be exercised in the 
way described above.  
5.6) AUDIT OF WORK  VOUCHERS 
The audit of work bills in the office may be done as stated below:  
i.  Whether estimate has been prepared for the work.  
ii.  Whether Administrative and Technical sanction for the estimate have been obtained.  
 
(Town panchayat Resolution No. and date and name of the Technical Authority who sanctioned the Estimate to 
be stated above with date of sanction).  
iii.  Whether tenders were called for and if so the name of the successful tenderer 
iv.  Tender percentage  
v.  When was the work measured and check measured  
vi.  Page No. of the Measurement Book in which measurements were recorded  
vii.  Whether recoveries for materials supplied, roller hire charges, etc., have been made in the Bill  
viii. Whether completion report has been prepared and got approved. (in the case of final bills)  
ix. Whether this expenditure has been entered in the Register of Roads or wells or culverts or immovable 
properties as the case may be 
x  The Auditor should see whether the above questionnaire has been duly filled up  
 
Along with the first bill copies of estimates with detailed measurement sheets will be attached. The estimates 
should be checked on the following lines:-  
i.  that the estimate provision for rates at which work are commonly executed in Panchayat;  
ii.  that the rates do not exceed those in the schedule of rates or the road metal rate;  
iii. that the requisite administrative and technical sanction has been quoted in the vouchers;  
iv.  that in the Case of revised estimates they are invariably accompanied by comparative statement duly approved.  
Note :  The correctness of the rates adopted and the value of the work with reference to the rate and quantity of 
work done should be checked and the discrepancies pointed out in the audit notes.  
The check of original tender files, measurement books, sanctioned Estimate should be marked for local audit.  
v. that the completion report duly approved by the technical authority, have been attached for the final bills.  
Expenditure on works not supported by measurement and     check   measurement  
 
An irregularity which is frequently noticed in audit in respect of execution of works in Town Panchayats, is want of 
duly recorded measurement and check measurement by competent authorities. But because of this defect it cannot be 
presumed in audit that no work was turned out at all. In the absence of any established loss, a surcharge is not possible. 
The usual practice followed in such cases is to request the technical and inspecting authorities, concerned to investigate, 
if the work was done and, if so, whether it was worth the expenditure incurred on it and to specify the exact amount of 
over payments so far as could be ascertained. Certain surcharges which were ordered without definite information 
regarding the loss sustained when there was no record of measurement or check measurement were, on appeal set 
 
51 
aside by the court on the ground that it was not the case of audit that the works were not executed, that no loss was 
established and that the mere fact that registers were not maintained properly and the rules for the execution of works 
were not adhered to, cannot be ground to press the matter to a surcharge. Whenever an objection for want of 
measurements, check measurements, etc., is noticed in audit, the Regional Deputy Director should take immediate steps 
to ascertain by reference to the Divisional Engineer (Highways) and District Collector whether the work was actually 
executed in the case and, if so, whether it was worth the amount paid therefor and if not what its reasonable cost would 
be, with details. No time should be lost in doing this as any delay would render identification of work, even if it has been 
executed, especially road works, difficult, if not impossible, thereby making a surcharge futile.  
  
It should also be possible for Assistant Director / Regional Deputy Director to verify locally during their inspections 
items included in special letters issued to executive authorities and expedite the disposal of special letters.  
 
In the case of each objection, included in a special letter which has now been admitted or cleared, the paragraph 
number of the audit report, the substance of objection in a few words as possible and the gist of the reply should first be 
written and then the notes should follow. If further notes are to be submitted on the orders already passed on an 
objection such notes should be written on continuation sheets so that the notes and orders on each paragraph must be 
continued until the item is finally dropped or surcharge certificate/special report    issued. In the case of objection 
admitted or cleared, it would be sufficient if the number and heading of the paragraph are written and a remark recorded 
that the objection has been admitted or cleared.  
  
When any objection raised in respect of (i) irregular write-off of taxes and fees or (ii) the existence of time barred 
arrears without any action having been taken for their collection is dropped on account, respectively of the write off being 
subsequently accepted or on the reply that the items were really found irrecoverable apart from the reason of their having 
become time-barred, an intimation should be sent to the executive authority of the local body merely to the effect that the 
objection has been dropped. The arrears of demand can, however; be removed from the registers of the local body only 
after their write-off has been sanctioned by the competent authority notwithstanding the fact that the objection in respect 
of the arrears has been admitted by this department on satisfactory explanation. When an objection is not considered for 
surcharge, as for instance, on the ground that the amount involved is below the surchargeable limit, action on the part of 
the executive authority for rectifying the defect is necessary and no intimation need in such cases be sent that the 
question of surcharge has been dropped.  
5.7 RETURN OF VOUCHERS TO TOWN PANCHAYATS:  
 
After the completion of local audit and issue of Audit report all vouchers (including the vouchers on which objections 
are raised) shall be returned to Town Panchayat with effect from 1984-85. (Director circular Roc.No.6696/D6/831Dt: I-I 0-
84 and Director Circular Roc.37059/D-85/dt: 17-5-85).  
(G.O.Ms.No.183, R.D.L.A., Dept., j dated 30th January 1974)  
6. 
SURCHARGE POWERS  
 
Fixing of relative responsibility certain guidelines and principles:- Under the surcharge rules, the auditor may 
disallow every item contrary to law and surcharge the same on the person making or authorising the making of the illegal 
payment. Either the person who makes the payment or the person who authorised the making of the payment may be 
surcharged. It was decided by the High Court in the Civil Revision Petition Nos. 1634 and 1635 of 1937 that it was 
somewhat inequitable to place the whole burden for an illegal payment on the President alone when such a payment was 
ratified by the board, and that all members who voted in ratification of the President‘s action were equally responsible. If 
an illegal payment is made by the President of a local board and the action of the President is ratified by the board both 
President who made the payment and the members of the boards who ratified the action of the President should be held 
jointly and severally liable to make good the illegal payment. The Government have (in G .0.2042, Local Administration, 
dated 26th July 1941) decided that the following principles should be observed in fixing the relative liability of municipal 
councils and executive authorities in respect of losses caused to municipal funds: 
 
If any expenditure proposed to be incurred is brought before the Municipal Council, the executive authority should 
prepare a note for the information of the council stating clearly whether:  
a. the proposed charge is within its powers of sanction;  
b.  it requires the sanction of a higher authority;  
 
52 
c.  such expenditure has been prohibited either by any statutory rules framed by the Government or executive 
orders issued by them or by any other authority. If the Council sanctions any objectionable item of expenditure 
without previous notice to the executive authority or without giving him an opportunity to scrutinize its legality, he 
should, before incurring the expenditure, invite the council‘s attention to the correct position and advise it to 
reconsider its resolution. He will be held solely responsible for any loss or illegal expenditure incurred by failure 
to follow this procedure.  
 
If the Council decides to incur any expenditure inspite of the fact the executive authority has already pointed out 
that incurring of the particular expenditure is against the orders of the Government or any other authority or that it is not 
covered by the Council‘s powers of sanction, the executive authority should address the concerned Administrative Head 
or the Government, as the case may be for orders in the matter and wait their orders before incurring the expenditure in 
question. In exceptional cases, where there is no time to obtain such orders and when the council‘s resolution in the 
matter is otherwise clear and the executive authority has no reason to believe that loss will occur, he may give effect to 
the Council‘s resolution and incur the expenditure. If any loss occurs in such cases the liability for it may be fixed on the 
members of the Council who voted for the resolution.  
 
If the Council sanctions any item of expenditure subject to the requisite sanction of higher authority being obtained, 
the executive authority should obtain such sanction before incurring the expenditure. If he fails to obtain such sanction 
and thus unauthorisedly incurs the expenditure, he will be held responsible for the illegal expenditure and for the loss 
involved. The government have ordered that the principles detailed in the second sub-paragraph above should be 
observed while fixing the relative liability of Panchayats and of their executive Officers also in respect of losses caused to 
panchayat funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
6.1) COLLECTION OF ARREARS OF TAXES AND FIXING OF RESPONSIBILITIES: The collection staff consisting of 
Revenue Assistants  Bill Collectors, Revenue Inspectors, the tax Clerk, Revenue Officers, Manager, Chief Ministerial 
Officer in-charge of collection work and the Executive Authorities are collectively responsible for any loss to the Municipal 
Councils due to the arrears of taxes becoming time barred and for non-recovery of the amount in time. The Government 
have prescribed certain procedure to watch the collection of arrears in G.O.Ms.No.419, Rural Development and Local 
Administration, dated 23rd February 1974 and Government Memo.No.l17816/M.VW74-1, Rural Development and Local 
Administration, dated 23rd February 1975. The audit should see whether the procedures prescribed in the above 
Government orders have been adhered to and the auditor should fix the responsibility on the authorities concerned for 
failure to collect the taxes. The names of responsible Bill Collector, Revenue Inspectors, the Tax Clerk, Revenue 
Officers, Manager, Chief Ministerial Officer in charge of collection work and the executive authorities who failed to follow 
the Government instructions to realise the arrears in time, should be mentioned in the audit paragraph relating to arrears 
of taxes. The Municipal Commissioner and each one of the Municipal employees who by their negligence, allow arrears 
to become time-barred will be dealt with Disciplinary action and by imposing penalties of recovery of the loss depending 
on the extent of negligence of each of the employees. While action is taken by the Commissioner on his subordinates for 
their negligence the Government will in each case initiate disciplinary action against the Commissioner concerned and 
pass such orders as are deemed necessary in each case.  
(G.O.Ms.No.1601, R.D.L.A., dared 14th September 1981).  
 
Government in G.O.Ms.No.92, M.A. & \V.S., dated 20th April 1992 have ordered that Municipal Commissioners 
should not be made responsible for any loss pointed out in audit if the powers to pass bills and sign cheques are 
delegated to the Subordinate authorities subject to conditions laid down in the above Govt. order.  
Note: 
1. Any new item of expenditure not specifically contemplated in the budget proposals (i.e.) not provided for in 
the approved budget or expenditure of capital nature should have the specific sanction/approval of the Commissioner 
before incurring such expenditure by the MHO/ME/RO/TPO/AO.  
 
53 
Note: 
2. Personal responsibility for loss etc can be fixed only in cases where the loss was the direct result of any 
wrong decision taken by a particular officer responsible for incurring expenditure or because of his personal negligence.  
Note: 
3  In other cases of losses and irregularities, the MHO/ME/TPO/RO/AO in office at the time of audit or at the 
time of receipt of Audit Report and his successors should assume responsibility to recover or regularise the loss / to set 
right the irregularity etc., This department will issue special letters to the ME/MHO/RO/AO if he is held responsible for the 
loss and irregularities.  
 
A person who is not a Councilor but who is a member of a Committee is as much liable for loss or waste as a 
Councilor is. Although Section 353 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act adverts only to the Chairman or Councilor 
it will be noticed that under Section 24 of the Act, all the provisions of the Act relating to the duties, powers, liabilities, 
disqualifications and disabilities of councilors are made applicable to members of special committees appointed under 
that section. This provision would include the liability arising under section 353. Further Rule 60 of Schedule IV is 
perfectly general in its terms.  
  
The auditor may charge against any person responsible there for the amount of any deficiency, loss or unprofitable 
outlay incurred by the negligence or misconduct of that person or of any sum which ought to have been but is not 
brought to account by that person and in every such case certify the amount due from such persons.  
  
In order to entitle the auditor to charge against any person the amounts of any deficiency or loss it is necessary to 
show that the deficiency or loss has been caused by the negligence of misconduct of the person responsible negligence 
or misconduct is a question of fact dependent on the special circumstances of each case. Gross carelessness or utter 
ignorance of the rules may amount to negligence while action in defiance of the rules would be misconduct. So in all 
cases where it is proposed to held a person responsible for the loss caused to a local body; the question should be 
examined and the personal orders of the Director taken as to how for it would be possible to prove that the loss was 
caused by the negligence or misconduct of the person.  
 
 
Note: 
Delay in claiming Government Grants and the Consequent lapse may be considered as negligence for purpose 
of surcharge. (Government Memo NO.13271-1, R.D. & L.A., dated 6th May 1939).  
6.2) SURCHARGE CERTIFICATE - ISSUE OF CERTAIN GUIDELINES  
 
(a) Losses caused to local bodies by the failure of the executive authorities to recover, taxes, within the period of 
limitation prescribed in Section 345 of Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act 1920 and Section 226 of  Tamil Nadu 
Panchayat Act, 1994 as also lease amounts are commonly met with and the following points should be observed in 
dealing with such cases under the surcharge rules: 
 
Surcharge relating to time-barred arrears of taxes should be made only after the expiry of the period of limitation 
prescribed in Section 345 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act 1920 and Section 226 of the Tamil Nadu 
Panchayat Act, 1994 respectively. The period of limitation on specified in these sections of the Acts for filling suit should 
be computed from the date on which the liability for the tax accrued i.e. 30 days after commencement of a half-year in 
respect of property tax in the case of Municipalities and 30 days after the commencement of the year in respect of House 
tax in the case of Town Panchayat and 60 days from the commencement of a half-year in respect of profession tax both 
in the case of Municipalities and Panchayats. The period of limitation for a prosecution is however different under rule 
30(2) of schedule IV to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 and Rule 25(2) of the rules relating to the 
Assessment and Collection of taxes contained in para 48 of the Manual on Panchayat Administration, Part-I, a defaulter 
can be prosecuted only if for any reason, a distraint or a sufficient distraint of the defaulter‘s property is impracticable. 
The period of limitation for prosecution is three years from the date on which it was found that a distraint become 
impracticable. A demand cannot ordinarily be kept alive for a period of six years or nine years as the case may be by the 
institution of distraint proceedings towards the close of three years or six years as the case may be from the date when 
the tax become payable thereby obtaining a right to prosecute the defaulter within a further period of three years if 
distraint or a sufficient distraint was then found to be impracticable for the reason that such delay in the institution of 
distraint become impracticable on the first day on which it could have been made i.e., 15 days after the service of 
demand bill or demand notice unless it can be definitely proved that the defaulter removed his property on a later date 
and thereby rendered the distraint or sufficient distraint impracticable on such later date‖.  
 
54 
  
In G.O.Ms.No.401, L.A., dated the 13th February 1941, the period of limitation amounts due in respect of leases of 
markets, cart stands slaughter-houses and other immovable properties has been specified. A sum due to a local body 
under a contract cannot be regarded as due to it within the meaning of section 345 of the Madras District Municipalities 
Act, 1920 and section 226 of Madras Panchayats Act. The period of limitation prescribed for the recovery of taxes, etc., 
under the respective Act will not apply to sums due to municipal councils, Panchayat Unions and Panchayats under 
contracts which are governed by Article 116 of the Schedule  I to the Indian Limitation Act, 1908. Such sums may, if the 
contracts have been registered be recovered by a suit with in three years from the date on which the cause of action 
arose. The absence of a registered agreement will not, however, debar the filing of a suit for recovery on QUANTUM 
MERUIT basis. Where there is written agreement but it has not been registered, the rights of a local body under the 
agreement as such will be unenforceable but it can Sue the lessee and recover reasonable compensation for the use 
and occupation of its property.  
 
So far as registered agreements are concerned the period limitation, viz., 3 years should commence from the date 
on which the FIRST DEFAULT in payment occurs. As regards cases in which unregistered agreements are available or 
no agreements have been obtained, the position should be that the question of agreement should be ignored altogether 
and as pointed out by Government in such cases, the case should be dealt with on a QUANTUM MERUIT basis. The 
cause of action in this case should be taken to have arisen from the date of occupation  by the lessee and the period of 
limitation should commence from this date.  
 
In the absence of a proper registered agreement the claim becomes unenforceable except on a QUANTUM 
MERUIT basis. As the Government have stated that it does not mean that registered agreements can be dispensed with, 
the fact that Executive Authority has failed to obtain an agreement is by itself a neglect on the part. It is as a result of this 
neglect that the case to be pursued on a QUANTUM MERUIT basis. If the same executive authority or another executive 
authority fails to file a suit within the period of limitation it is a further contributory negligence in this part. Again, although 
the period of limitation starts from the date of occupation by the lessee since he begins to enjoy the benefit of the lease, 
the lease is a continuing transaction and the occupation continues either till the end of the period of lease or some date 
before that. Consequently, the last date of period of limitation should be counted from the last date of occupation  So in 
the case of suits which can be tried on QUANTUM MERUIT basis, the period of limitation will start from three years from 
the date of occupation and will continue to three years from the last date of occupation and during this period, if more 
than one executive authority hold the office, all of them should be surcharged.  
  
While surcharging losses on account of non-realisation of lease amounts the penalty or penal interest foregone by 
the local body should not be included in the amount to be surcharged (Local Administration Department U.O. Note 
NO.6034-2C, Local Administration, dated 15th April 1944).  
 
While surcharging losses of time-barred arrears of license fees the following points should be kept in view:  
 
According to Sections 347 and 165 of the Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920 and Madras Panchayats Act, 
1958 respectively as amended, prosecutions shall be launched within three months of the commission of the offence. 
Failure to take out a license shall for the purpose of these sections be treated as a continuing offence until the expiration 
of period if any, for which the license is required and if no period is specified, prosecutions shall be launched within 
twelve months from the commencement of the offence. The executive authorities who were in office during the year as 
well as the executive authority or executive authorities who were in office during the first three months of the succeeding 
year and who failed to take the coercive measures enjoined by the provisions in the Acts should be held responsible for 
the loss.  
  
In the case of losses due to negligence on the part of Municipal Engineers, the Municipal Commissioners shall 
arbitrate on the issue and pass suitable orders of recovery against the Municipal Engineers concerned. The Municipal 
Engineers will however have right of appeal to the Government and in the case of such an appeal, the Government shall 
obtain the remarks of the concerned Department viz., Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board and the Director of 
Municipal Administration and pass suitable orders of recovery. (G.O.Ms.No.1308, Rural Development and Local 
Administration, dated 21st August 1979).  
  
Under the existing surcharge provisions it is open to the auditor to fix the amount of loss or deficiency in a particular 
case on the basis of previous or subsequent figures or other reasonable data in the absence of definite and correct 
details as to amounts. In the case of an omission. to assess a person to profession tax or lease out a property belonging 
to or vesting in a local body during a half-year or a year the auditor can base his surcharge on the tax recovered or lease 
amount realised during the preceding and succeeding half-year or years. If in a case relating to works expenditure the 
auditor has no data to proceed upon, he may write to Government who will take steps to obtain such data or information 
 
55 
as may be available to enable the auditor to estimate the loss or deficiency by exercising the controlling powers they 
possess under sections 34 and 39 of the District Municipalities Act or similar provisions under the other Acts.  
  
Judgments of the High Court and opinions of the Advocate General on matters relating to audit and surcharge are 
printed in Volume IV of the Manual.  
  
When a decision is taken on the special letter file that a surcharge certificate should be issued in respect of  an 
objection included in the Special letter, a surcharge certificate should be drafted and submitted to the Director. The 
surcharge file should be distinct and separate from the special letter and audit report files. An extract of the objections 
from the audit report on which a special letter was issued, the office copy of the special letter issued, replies, if any, 
received to the special letter, other correspondence in connection with the special letter, notes and orders of the Director 
should form the special letter file. The office copy of the surcharge certificate and the correspondence in connection with 
it should form the surcharge files. This file will ultimately be filed in the Head Office. At the time the surcharge certificate 
is drafted, the auditor and the Regional Deputy Director concerned should get themselves posted with the up-to-date 
information on the objection in respect of which a surcharge certificate is proposed to be issued, if necessary by issuing a 
memorandum to the executive authority and obtaining his reply. In the case of an item of expenditure, which is held 
under objection for want of competent sanction, it should be made sure that sanction has not been obtained and 
communicated to the Audit Office and in the case of an objection dealing with time-barred arrears, the latest demand, 
collection and balance statement received should be verified to see that the amount held  under objection and proposed 
to be surcharged has not subsequently been collected. They should thus verify the correct position of the objection as far 
as it is possible so that the surcharge may not challenge the facts of the case mentioned in the surcharge certificate. The 
correct name, designation and address of the person to be surcharged should be noted in the draft surcharge certificate. 
The vouchers if any, referred to in the surcharge certificate, should be put up.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
The opening and closing paragraphs of a surcharge certificate relating to Municipal Councils should be in 
the form indicated below:  
 
I, ......................................................................Director of Local Fund Accounts, Chennai do hereby certify, under 
rule 60 of Schedule IV to the Madras District Municipalities Act 1920 as amended that a sum of Rs.......... 
 
(Rupees............. 
) representing loss caused to illegal expenditure from the Municipal Fund is surchargeable on 
and due from Thiru / Thirumathi ................ who was Chairman and Executive Authority of the aforesaid Municipality from 
the  to for the reason set forth below:  
 
―The amount should be credited to the aforesaid Municipal Council within fourteen days after the receipt of this 
certificate unless action is taken under rule 61 of Schedule IV to the Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920 as amended 
by G.O. Nos. 4129, Local Administration, dated the 6th November 1937 and 2489, Local Administration, dated 26th June 
1939.  
 
Dated at  
 
 
 
this day of  
 
The opening and closing paragraph of a surcharge certificate to losses, etc., caused to Panchayat Funds and 
Panchayat Union Funds should be in the form shown below:  
 
―I, ..........  
Director of Local Fund Accounts, Chennai do hereby certify under Rule 5(1) of the Rules issued under 
section clause (XVI-9) of the Madras Panchayats Act Paragraph 30 of Manual  
on Panchayat Administration Part-II 
that a sum of Rs. (Rupees  representing the loss caused to the  ............. Panchayat/Panchayat Union Fund (......... 
District) is surchargeable on and due from Thiru/Thirumathi  who was the ……of  the Panchayat/Panchayat Union from 
............. to ...........  
for the reasons setforth below:  
 
The amount should be paid to the credit of  the aforesaid.........Panchayat Fund/Panchayat Union Fund 
(...........District) within fourteen days after the receipt of this certificate unless action is taken under rule 6 of the Rules 
 
56 
issued under section (XVI-9) of the Madras Panchayats Act, Paragraph 30 of Manual on Panchayat Administration Part-
II.  
Note: 
l. Interest at 6 percent per annum will be charged on the surcharged amount due with effect from the day 
following the last day fixed for payment of the said surcharged amount. The above rates of interest is applicable in 
respect of surcharged amounts relating to the institutions other than the Panchayat institutions under Tamil Nadu 
Panchayat Act. 
Note: 
2. Under Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act the rate of interest to be charged on the surcharged amount has been 
increased from 6 percent to 12 percent.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 2414, Rural Development and Local Administration,  Dept., dated 27th November 1968).  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1855, Rural Development and Local Administration,  Dept., dated 3rd December 1980).  
 
The intervening paragraphs of surcharge certificate should set forth the grounds for surcharge. Copies of surcharge 
certificates should be communicated to-  
i. 
the person or persons surcharged.  
ii.  the Executive Authority of the concerned institution.  
iii.  the Secretary to Government (of the concerned department).  
iv. the concerned Head of department.  
v. the Collector of the District concerned.  
        vi.   Assistant Director and Regional Deputy Director concerned.  
 
 
 
 
             Copies of the surcharge certificates should be signed by the Director, and  the surcharge should be sent by 
Registered post acknowledgement due. The receipt of the acknowledgement should be watched by the Regional Deputy 
Director. If the person to whom a copy of the surcharge certificate is furnished refused to receive it, he is deemed to have 
been duly furnished with a copy of the surcharge certificate and the period fixed for appeal is in such cases calculated 
from the date of such refusal. If the Postal Department should return the letter containing the surcharge certificate on the 
ground that the whereabouts of the surchargees are not known, steps should be taken to ascertain the whereabouts of 
the surcharge by addressing the Collector or Executive Authority of the Local Body concerned. It was decided in 
G.O.Ms.No.239, L.A., dated the 21st January 1942, that if there should be any difficulty in serving surcharge certificates, 
special letters and summons issued by auditors under the relevant surcharge rules by post, Director may forward to the 
Collectors for arranging for service of the copies of the documents on the parties concerned and for obtaining their 
acknowledgements and for sending them to the Director or his assistants.  
Note: 
If the person to whom the surcharge certificate is issued is a detenu and refuses to receive it while in detention, 
it should be served after his release.  
(Local Administration Department U.O. Note No.1359-2C, Local Administration, dated 3rd March 1944) 
 
a. Any person aggrieved by disallowance, surcharge or charge made, may within fourteen days, after he has 
received or been served with decision of the auditor, either  
a.  
apply to the court of law as specified in the following references, or  
b. 
in lieu of such application appeal to the Government.  
 
i. 
Rule 22 under Part-Ill of schedule V to the Madras City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919.  
 
ii. 
Rule 22 under Part-Ill of schedule III to the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1911.  
 
iii. 
Rule 21 under Part-Ill of schedule III to the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981.  
 
57 
 
iv. 
Rule 6(i) under Part-II of schedule IV to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920.  
 
v. 
Section 122(3) of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961.  
 
b.  
In the case of Panchayat and Panchayat Union, the appeal may be made within the fourteen days time limit to 
the court of law or to the Director of Rural Development as per rule 6(1) of the rules under para 39 of the 
Manual on Panchayat Administration Part-I and rule 6(i) of the rule under para 30 of the Manual on Panchayat 
Administration Part-II respectively as amended in G.O. Ms. No. 1047, Rural Development and Local 
Administration, dated 8th July 1979.  
 
c.  
As per rule 162 of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Produce Market Rules, 1962, the appeal shall be made within 
fourteen days to the Government in the Food and Agricultural Department. Any order passed on such appeal 
by the State Government shall be final. Similarly, as per rule 30 of Tamil Nadu Public Libraries‘ Rules 1950, 
the appeal shall be made only to Government.  
  
When the person or persons surcharged, appeal to the court the summons and a copy of the plaint would be 
received in the Head Office. On receipt of the above documents, the Collector should be requested to instruct the 
Government Pleader to appear on behalf of the Director  who is sole respondent in surcharge cases. A copy of the letter 
addressed to the Collector should at the same time be forwarded to the Government Pleader and the Assistant Director 
concerned. The Assistant Director should place at the disposal of Government Pleader all relevant papers, instruct him 
as regards the facts of the case and obtain from him a draft counter. The draft counter should be obtained sufficiently in 
advance of the date fixed for the filing of it in the Court. If there should be any delay and the points raised in the plaint 
require scrutiny, the Government Pleader should be advised to obtain a short adjournment. The draft counter should, 
after being examined by the Regional Deputy Director with a view to see that all the points raised in the petition have 
been met in the draft counter, be submitted to the Director for approval. The draft counter should after approval by the 
Director be signed by the Assistant Director ―for Director‖ and returned to the Government Pleader for being filed in the 
Court. The Regional Deputy Director keep a watch over the progress of the suit in the court. As soon as orders are 
passed on surcharge appeals, Regional Deputy Director should intimate the result to the Head Office and also write to 
the Government Pleader request them to obtain copies of judgements and decrees.  
  
The Government Pleader, Madras should appear in all the cases in the High Court, Madras and the City 
Government Pleader, Madras in all the cases in the cases in the Courts in Madras other than the High Court, Madras on 
behalf of the Director  of Local Fund Audit in surcharge cases relating to the Corporation of Chennai and Corporate 
Bodies in Chennai City.  
(G.O.Ms.No.1029, Finance and Local Administration Department, dated 18th September 1965).  
(Memo No.II7215-AlT&.A!65-5, Finance. dated 23rd November 1965).  
  
Where against a surcharge order issued against several persons, only one appeals, it depends on the nature of the 
order whether he alone will benefit or also others who did not appeal. If the order on appeal is reversal of surcharge all 
will benefit. If it exonerated one member as not responsible for act done and not therefore liable to surcharge then he 
alone benefits by the order. The order will have to be construed in each case as to whether it intends the cancellation of 
the order as a whole or the exoneration of the individual appellant only.  
  
When an appeal is not preferred by the surchargee  within the time allowed or when an appeal is dismissed by the 
court or Government, the Executive Authority in the case of surcharges relating to Municipal Councils and the Collector 
of the district in the case of surcharge relating to the Panchayat Unions and Panchayats are required to take execution 
proceedings for the recovery of the amounts covered by the decree if the surchargee does not pay the amount covered 
by the surcharge certificates of that decreed by the Court. To avoid unnecessary filing of execution petitions in cases 
where the surcharged amounts have been credited the Commissioner of Panchayat Union and Executive Authority of 
Panchayat and the surchargee should be asked in the Surcharge certificates sent to them to give intimation of credits of 
surcharged amounts to the Collector. As a further precaution, the Collectors also have been requested to ascertain from 
the executive authorities of Panchayat Union Councils and Panchayat concerned immediately before actually filing 
execution petitions, that the amounts due have not already been recovered. In case where surcharges are issued jointly 
and severally on more than one person, any sum paid by any of the persons against whom the certificate has been 
issued would be accepted but it should be made clear that such acceptance is without prejudice to the right of 
Government to recover the entire balance of surcharge amount or so much thereof as remains unpaid from the party 
making the payment. Execution proceedings may be taken against anyone or more than one of the persons surcharged 
for the recovery of so much of the total amount of surcharge as remains unpaid. If the surcharge is waived altogether on 
appeal all amounts tendered by the surcharge will have to be refunded.  
 
58 
(L.A. U.O. Note No. 17175, Local Administration Department, dated 24th January 1938).  
 
Charges incurred by Collectors in taking execution proceedings on behalf of the Unions for the recovery of amounts 
surcharged should be met in the first instance from State funds and recouped from the sums recovered from the 
surcharges the balance being credited to the local body concerned.  
 
In cases, where it is not possible to recover the costs of execution proceedings from the surchargee the cost should 
be recovered from the local body concerned.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 2579. Local Administration, dated 3rd July 1939) 
 
Similarly charges incurred by Collectors in taking execution proceedings on behalf of Panchayats for the recovery 
of the amounts surcharged should be met in the first instance from State Funds and recouped from the sums recovered 
from surchargee the balance being credited to the Panchayats concerned. In cases where it is not possible to recover 
the costs of the execution proceedings from the surchargee the cost should be recovered from the Panchayat 
concerned.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1095, Local Administration, dated 18th May 1953) 
 
When surcharge appeals are disposed of by Courts, costs  are sometimes awarded in favour of the Director These 
costs are to be recovered from the Surcharge along with the amount of surcharge declared to be due by the Court and 
credited to State funds. This Department also should watch the recovery of the cost. To this end, on receipts of decree 
from the Government Pleader, the amount of costs decreed should be separately noted in column (8) ―Result of Appeal‖ 
in the Register of surcharges. Before the surcharge certificate file is closed, the Regional Deputy Director should 
ascertain and make a note both in the register and in the surcharge certificate file whether the full amount of costs has 
also been recovered and credited to State funds. At the end of each year i.e. on the 15th October and 15th April each 
year, Regional Deputy Director should submit to the Head Office a list of fresh cases where costs were awarded to 
Government in surcharge cases giving the following particulars. The list should include also all cases reported in 
previous half years in which recovery of costs is pending together with full information regarding the stage at which each 
case stands. The fact that the costs pending recovery have not become time-barred in any case should be examined by 
the Regional Deputy Director, periodically and they should append a certificate to that effect in the statement to be 
submitted, Where costs are due to the surchargee the fact of payment of costs with date should also be reported. If there 
are no cases to be reported, a ―nil‖ return should be sent.  
1.  
Name of Surchargee  
2. 
Number and date of surcharge certificate  
3. 
O.P. Number and date  
4.  
Costs awarded to Government  
(Director L.F. No. 316, dated 10th April 1943, L.F.No  6420. dated 24th. November 1949) 
(L.F. No. 10559, dated 27th March 1950 and L.F. No. 4300, dated 4th August 1951).  
  
Along with the closed surcharge files sent to Head Office for record a separate sheet containing the information the 
following form should be enclosed:  
 
1. 
Name of the Surchargee  
 
2. 
Number and date of the Surcharge Certificate  
 
3. 
Amount Surcharged  
 
Appeal in the District Court.  
 
4. 
Number and date of the appeal  
 
5. 
How disposed of  
 
6. 
Particulars of costs awarded  
 
 
(a)  
to the Surcharge  
 
 
(b)  
to the Director   
 
7. 
Amount and date of payment of fees, etc., to Government Pleader  
 
8. 
Date of payment of costs awarded to the Surcharge  
 
59 
 
9. 
Date of realisation of the costs awarded to the Examiner  
 
Appeal in the High Court  
 
10. Number and date of the appeal  
 
11. How disposed of  
 
12. Particulars of Costs awarded  
 
 
(a)  
to the Surcharge  
 
 
(b)  
to the Director   
 
13. Amount and date of payment of fees, etc., to Government Pleader  
 
14. Date of payment of costs awarded to the Surcharge  
 
15. Date of realisation of the costs awarded to the Director   
 
Appeal to Government.  
 
16. Number and date of the orders disposing the appeal  
 
17. Result of the appeal  
 
18. Surcharge amount as confirmed by the appellate authority  
 
19. Date of payment of the amount to the funds of the Local body  
Certified that no further action is necessary in the surcharge case and the file may be closed 
(Director Circular L.F .No. 4235, dated 18th September 1945) 
6.3)  GOVERNMENT WAIVER POWER:   
 
Not withstanding anything contained in the surcharge and disallowance rules, the Government may at any time 
direct that the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount certified to be due from any person by the auditor under 
the surcharge and disallowance rules shall be waived if, in their opinion, such a course is necessary considering all the 
circumstances of the case.  
i.  
Rule 64 of the rules under part-II of Schedule-IV to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act 1920.  
ii.  
Rule 9 of the rules under para 39 of the Manual on Panchayat Administration Part-I (Panchayats).  
iii.  
Rule 9 of the rules under para 30 of the Manual on Panchayat Administration Part-II (Panchayat Unions). 
iv.  
Rule 164 of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Produce Market Rules 1962.  
v.  
Section 122(5) of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961.  
vi. 
Rule 31 of the Tamil Nadu Public Libraries Rules, 1950.  
 
There is no such waiver power vested with Government under the Madras City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919, 
the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971, and the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981.  
  
Surcharge rules do not provide for proceeding against the legal heirs of a deceased person who has caused loss in 
which surcharge proceeding are contemplated. If however, a surcharge order had been made and served on the person 
before his death, it should be legally enforced against the heirs to the extent of his assets in their hands.  
(Memorandum No. 29863 1 B-1, Local Administration,  dated 20th September 1940).  
  
Section 41(6) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 lays down that when a council is dissolved or 
superceded the State Government until the date of reconstitution thereof and the reconstituted council thereafter shall be 
entitled to all its assets and subject to all its liabilities the council as on the date of dissolution or supercession and on the 
date of reconstitution respectively. Similarly section 155(6) of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, also lays down that when 
a council is dissolved the State Government until the date of reconstitution thereof and the reconstituted council 
thereafter shall be entitled to all the assets and subject to all the liabilities of the council as on the date of the dissolution 
and on the date of reconstitution respectively.  
 
60 
 
The Government appear to hold the assets only on behalf of the Municipal Council and Panchayat Union Council 
and Panchayat as a trustee. Consequently, the amount of surcharge due to a superseded or dissolved Municipal Council 
or a dissolved Panchayat Union Council cannot for the purpose of recovery be considered to be State of debt.  
(G.O.Ms.No.1689, Local Administration. Dept., dated 9th May 1940) 
 
When a conclusive report from the Collector or Executive Authority as the case may be regarding the 
irrecoverability of a surcharged amount is received in the Regional Deputy Director Office, the Regional Deputy Director 
of  Local Fund Audit should take necessary action to close the surcharge case in his registers and submit the same to 
Head Office with a draft report to Government intimating its closure, inviting reference to the report of the Collector or 
Executive Authority. Such amounts may be suggested to be omitted from the demand registers of the local bodies if they 
relate to revenue items or admitted in accounts if they relate to expenditure.  
 
Further surcharge against the person from whom amounts previously surcharged were found irrecoverable should 
continue to be considered on merits irrespective of the fact that previous surcharges against them were ineffective on 
any ground including recoverability.  
  
If in a surcharge case, the decision of the court is infavour of the petitioner it should be considered whether there is 
a case for revision or appeal in the High Court against the decision of the District Court. The opinion of the Government 
pleader who appeared in the District Court on behalf of the Director should be obtained on the question of revision or 
appeal and if any appeal or revision is decided upon, the Government should be requested to order the Government 
Pleader, Madras, to file an appeal or a revision petition if in his opinion such a course is necessary or advisable. On 
receipt of orders of Government on the question of filing an appeal or a revision petition the Government Pleader, 
Madras should be supplied with such records as he may call for.  
 
A surcharge in respect of an irregularity or impropriety noticed during the audit of the accounts for the period prior to 
abolition of a local body will be legally correct and such a surcharge order will not be vitiated by reason of the local body 
having been abolished. It should be mentioned in the surcharge order that the illegal payment was made from or the loss 
was caused to the funds of the defunct institution.  
 
 
 
(a) 
Reports of losses caused to and of illegal payments should be made  as follows : 
 
 Municipal Councils  - Director of Municipal Administration in the case of all Municipal Commissioners 
(G.0.Ms.No.1994, Rural Development and Local Administration, dated 24th September 1976), 
 
Panchayat Union Councils - Director of Rural Development in the case of Panchayat Union Commissioners.  
Town Panchayats - To the Collector concerned/Director of Town Panchayats   
(G.O. Ms. No. 4201, L.A., Dept., dated 10th December 1940) 
(G.O. Ms .No. 1526, R.D.L.A., Dept., dated 6th July 1962)  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1599, L.A., Dept., dated 7th November 1957) 
(G.O. Ms. No. 1994, R.D.L.A., Dept.,  dated 24th September 1976)  
6.4) TAMIL NADU PANCHAYATS (ISSUE AND DISPOSAL OF AUDIT REPORTS OF PANCHAYAT UNION 
COUNCIL AND DISTRICT PANCHAYAT) RULES 2000 
 
Accounts and Records to be Produced to the Auditor:  The Commissioner of a Panchayat Union Council or 
Secretary of District Panchayat, as the case many be, shall send all accounts and records of the Panchayat Union 
Council or District Panchayat to the Auditor, appointed under sub-section (1) of section 193 of the Act, as required by him 
and also to the Accountant General and his subordinate officers, whenever he or his subordinate officers demand the 
production of records of a Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat. 
 
61 
 
Annual Accounts: The Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, shall finalise the accounts of a year in 
respect of all funds, close all the relevant registers and send the annual accounts to the auditor before the 15th of May of 
the year following the year to which the accounts relate. 
 
Audit of Panchayat Union Council and District Panchayat Accounts:  The Auditor shall conduct the audit of 
accounts of the Panchayat Union Council and District Panchayat every year, soon after the Commissioner or Secretary, 
as the case may be, submits the annual accounts for the previous year in respect of all funds maintained by him or 
concurrently as and when the bills are passed for payment by the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be. 
 
The Auditor shall take up the audit of the accounts of the Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat in his 
jurisdiction from the month of June onwards and complete the audit of all such institutions in his jurisdiction within 12 
months of the date of receipt of annual accounts by him.  If so, directed by the Government the auditor, shall take up 
concurrent audit of the voucher of the Panchayat Union or District Panchayat soon after payment is made and send audit 
slips after every voucher is audited by him concurrently. 
 
Powers of the Auditors: The auditor may, by summons in writing 
 
Require the production of any book, deed, contract, account, voucher, receipt or other document, the perusal or 
examination of which he considers necessary; 
 
Require any person having the custody or control of any such documents or person accountable for it to appear in 
person before him duly specifying the purpose of production; and  
 
Require any person so appearing to make and sign a declaration in respect of such document or to answer any 
question or to prepare and furnish any statement relating thereto. 
 
Whoever fails to comply with any requisition lawfully made upon him under this rule, shall be punishable with fine 
may extend to one hundred rupees or in case of a continuing breach, with fine not exceeding fifteen rupees for every day 
during which the breach continues after conviction for the first breach. 
 
Scrutiny of the Records: The auditor shall scrutinise every item of receipts and expenditure subject to checks, 
prescribed in the audit manual and instructions issued by Rural Development Department from time to time and find out 
whether the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be has conducted the financial transactions of the institution in 
accordance with the Issue and Disposal of Audit Reports of Panchayat Unions Council and District Panchayat rules and 
orders laid down by Govt. from time to time. 
 
Preparation and Finalisation of Audit Reports: The auditor, during the course of audit shall either in annual audit 
or concurrent audit issue a copy of the draft of objection on any transaction, which he considers, is not in accordance 
with the Issue and Disposal of Audit Reports of Panchayat Union Council and District Panchayat rules and orders laid 
down by Rural Development Department in Govt. from time to time, to the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may 
be on getting his acknowledgement.  On receipt of such draft audit objection, the Commissioner or Secretary, as the 
case may be shall take effective action to set right the defects pointed out therein and furnish replies to the auditor, as 
soon as possible or before the audit is over, as to the nature of action taken for setting right the objection and get his 
acknowledgement.  The auditor shall be bound to consider such replies received from the Commissioner or Secretary, as 
the case may be, during the course of the audit and may either drop the draft objection or modify the same based on the 
nature of replies received.  At the closure of the audit, the auditor shell  present it to the Commissioner or Secretary,  and 
obtain the dated signature of the Commissioner or Secretary,  at the end of each page of the audit report.  The 
Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, while signing in the audit report, shall write against each objection 
either ―accepted the objection mentioned in the para‖, or write ―not accepted as the objection lacks authority for the basis 
of the objection in this para‖.  The Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit while scrutinising and reviewing the draft audit 
report in the presence of the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, during local passing shall examine the 
objections and finalise the audit report.  In case, Commissioner or Secretary as the case may be, is not convinced about 
the authority for the basis of certain objections, the Asst. Director of Local Fund Audit shall ask the Commissioner or 
Secretary, as the case may be, to record his views briefly on the objection and then add the same to the audit report.  
Such views as recorded by the Commissioner or Secretary, shall be part of the audit report. 
 
Review of Audit Report: The reviewing authority namely, the Asst. Director of Local Fund Audit Department, shall 
not include any objection in the report for which draft audit objection was not furnished to the Commissioner or Secretary, 
as the case may be, previously in the draft stage and in such cases he shall look into the transaction afresh and decide 
its proprietary for inclusion in the audit report.  In order to avoid such contingency, the Commissioner or Secretary, as the 
 
62 
case may be shall ensure that the records and registers requested in audit are produced systematically during the course 
of audit. 
 
Contents of Audit Report: The audit report shall contain, besides the names of the Commissioners or Secretaries, 
as the case may be who were in office during the period of audit, the names of the engineers, the union overseers and 
other officers who were also in office during the period of audit.  In addition to these, the names of officials who (other 
than Assistant)  recommended payment for an item of expenditure, which is objected to, at the stage prior to the approval 
by the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, and in the case of loss of revenue and in respect of the defects 
in the stores accounting the name of the officials including Assistants who are responsible for the loss of revenue or for 
the maintenance of materials, accounts and custody of such stocks, shall also, be  specified at the end of each objection, 
for facilitating the fixing of proportionate and joint responsibility on the principle of contributory negligence on the officials 
who are jointly or severally responsible for an irregular or inadmissible expenditure incurred. 
 
Sending of Audit Reports and Special Report on Serious Irregularities: The Assistant Director of Local Fund 
Audit shall send the audit report on the accounts of a Panchayat Union Council, or District Panchayat to the 
Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, within thirty days of the completion of audit by the subordinate auditors, 
send a copy of audit report to the Assistant Director of Rural Development (Audit) of the district and to the Inspector 
concerned.  In addition to this, he shall also submit to the Director of Local Fund Audit, copies of objections involving 
serious financial and other persistent irregularities for further action, who may communicate such of those audit 
objections which in his opinion, are serious in nature, to the Government for such action as may be found necessary. 
 
The auditor shall communicate copies of objections to the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, in 
whose period the expenditure in question, was incurred in cases where it is considered that he is personally responsible 
for the expenditure and obtain his acknowledgment.  The personal responsibility shall arise in a case where the 
Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, has taken an exceptional or different decision, departing from the office 
advice, for incurring an expenditure which has given room for the objection or cannot be recovered from the recipient 
legally.  When the present Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, can and has to take effective action to fix 
responsibility and recover the amount either from the recipient of money legally or from the officials who administratively 
tendered wrong advice, such cases should not be considered as matters for which the past Commissioner or Secretary, 
as the case may be, is personally responsible.  In cases where the limitation of time stands in the way of lawful recovery 
of an objected expenditure, only the officials who were in office from the date of receipt of audit report to the crucial date 
of time bar, shall be considered as responsible for not initiating action for recovery before the date of time bar and action 
shall be taken to fix responsibility for the reported loss on the principle of contributory negligence and joint responsibility. 
 
Actions to be taken on Audit Objections: The Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, soon after the 
receipt of audit report, shall initiate action and arrange to open one file for each objections in the concerned branch or 
seat, pursue effective speedy and systematic action to settle the objections and furnish final replies to all the objections 
raised.  No audit file shall be closed before the receipt of orders settling the objections contained therein.  Wherever 
recovery orders are required to be passed by the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, for recovering the 
amount for settlement of objections, such orders shall be passed immediately, by him after following the prescribed 
procedure.  In cases, where recovery orders have to be passed by an outside authority, the Commissioner or Secretary, 
as the case may be, shall send proposals with all relevant details to such authority who shall initiate action for issuing 
recovery orders and pass final orders within two months of the receipt of the proposal from the Commissioner or 
Secretary, as the case may be, by having recourse to the rules relating to the disciplinary action. 
 
It shall b the  bounden duty of the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be and his staff who are in office at 
the time of receipt of audit report issued in concurrent audit to take effective action to settle the audit objections.  If the 
Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, in office considers that any orders passed by the previous 
Commissioner or Secretary as the case may be, contrary to the office advice, is responsible for the objection in question, 
he may address the Assistant Director of Rural Development (Audit) concerned, for fixing up of responsibility on the 
person or persons concerned adhering to the principles of joint responsibility and contributory negligence and passing 
necessary recovery orders within a month from the date of receipt of proposals by him. Suitable replies may   thereafter 
be furnished on all those objections. 
 
Audit Report to be placed before the Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat: The Commissioner or 
Secretary, as the case may be, after preparing proper and final replies to the objections place the audit report and the 
replies to the objections before the Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat, as the case may be, for discussion 
and suitable decision.  He shall send the replies, addressed to the Auditor, in triplicate with a copy of the resolution of the 
Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat to the Inspector through the Assistant Director of  Rural Development 
 
63 
(Audit) concerned, within two months from the date of receipt of audit report.  The Assistant Director of Rural 
Development (Audit) concerned shall scrutinise the replies, offer his remarks as to the acceptability of replies or 
otherwise and communicate the review to the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit along with a copy of replies received 
from the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, within 15 days of the receipt of report.  The Assistant Director 
of Local Fund Audit concerned shall scrutinise the replies of the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, along 
with the remarks of the Assistant Director (Audit) concerned, pass orders as to the dropping of the objections or their 
continuance, pending further replies and communicate them to the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, 
within a month from the date of  receipt of report from the Assistant Director of Rural Development (Audit) concerned. 
 
Action for Settlement of the Audit Objections: No audit report shall be kept pending for more than 2 years from 
the date of receipt of the report by the Commissioner or Secretary as the case may be.  It shall be the responsibility of 
the Commissioner or Secretary, as the case may be, to take action to settle audit objections by adopting such speedy 
and effective measures as are necessary including recourse to recovery orders wherever necessary.  It is the 
responsibility of the Inspector concerned to watch effective action at all levels, for the early settlement of the objections 
and ensures closure of audit report within the period specified above after the settlement of all objections. 
 
Restriction for Re audit: After the issue of an audit reports on the accounts of the Panchayat Union council or 
District Panchayat, as the case may be, for a year, the audit of the accounts for the year shall not be reopened, save with 
the special orders of the Government. 
(G.O. Ms. No.199  Rural Development Dept.  dt:31-07-2000) 
7. 
RESULT OF AUDIT 
7.1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS  
 
Audit depends for the effective value in its right and duty to report results to the proper authority, so that appropriate 
action may be taken to rectify the irregularity and impropriety, wherever possible or to prevent a recurrence of it. This 
authority may be a departmental authority or local body or Government.  
  
It is in the treatment of results of audit that the auditorial function demands the highest qualities of understanding 
balanced judgement and sense of proportion; and it is to enable him to deal with results adequately that the auditor has 
been accorded a high degree of independence and prestige. An Auditor must develop an instinct for assessing the 
importance of an individual irregularity.  
 
The auditor must keep before him his primary functions of securing the substantial correctness of accounts and the 
regularity and propriety of individual financial transitions. He must decide therefore, when the detailed audit of accounts 
and transactions has been completed and all infractions of rules and orders noticed. whether to demand regularisation or 
correction in an individual case, or whether to be satisfied with prevention of the error or irregularity for the future. In 
Particular, it will be remembered that, while financial rules and orders must be observed, mere rigid and literal 
enforcement of such rules and orders may degenerate into wholly unintelligent audit. As a general rule, undue insistence 
on trifling errors and technical irregularities should be avoided and more time and attention devoted to the investigation 
or really important and substantial irregularities with the object, not only of securing rectification of the particular 
irregularity but also of ensuring regularity and propriety in similar cases for the future, At the same time, failure to 
appreciate the significance of what appears to be a trifling regularity may lead to failure to discover an important fraud or 
defalcation. Again, notice may be taken of as indicating carelessness and inefficiency in the maintenance of accounts or 
in financial administration generally.  
  
All observations and objections must be conveyed in courteous and impersonal terms and must be legible and 
intelligible. It is of utmost importance that any statement of criticism or irregularity, in an audit notes or audit report should 
be accurate, fair, moderately worded and dispassionate. The word ―Moral turpitude‖ should not be used in Audit Report. 
The words Fraud, Misappropriation, Defalcation, Manipulation and such other words which lead to criticism may be 
avoided while drafting the Audit Reports. The legal aspects of the above words should be clearly understood before 
using them.  
(L.F. (P,U.) 12374, dated 9th August 1967) 
(Director Circular Roc.No.F-2 96622/77/ dated 30th September 1977)  
7.2) Audit Notes:  
 
64 
 
The procedure for taking and recording objections in audits conducted in the offices of Assistant Director is 
prescribed in another chapter. The objection noticed in audits conducted in the offices of local bodies should be written in 
rough notes on one third margin folio or quarter size paper stitched into note book. After action has been taken to settle 
as many of objections as possible by personal discussion, the items remaining unsettled should be incorporated in the 
Audit Notes or the Audit Reports. Item number in the audit notes or the paragraph number in the audit report should be 
noted against each objection for facility of future reference.  
 
Audit notes, either half-yearly or annual may be issued. The audit notes will be prepared in duplicate either typed or 
in manuscript and one copy issued to the local body with a covering letter for furnishing replies within the prescribed 
time. There shall be no delay in the issue of audit notes.  
Note: 
1. The name of the auditor, the name and designation of the official reviewing the audit, the time taken for 
audit and the period of audit should be indicated at the beginning of the audit notes.  
Note: 
2. The half-yearly audit notes should be issued within 15 days from the date of completion of audit. The annual 
audit notes should be issued along with the audit report. 
 
At the time of Annual Audit, the objections of serious nature pending in the audit notes on the audit of first half year 
and Audit notes on monthly voucher audits, should be incorporated in the Audit Report and the objections of minor 
nature pending in such audit notes incorporated in the annual audit notes. After eary over all objections either to the 
Audit Report or to the Annual Audit Notes, the half yearly and monthly audit notes should be closed and sent to Record. 
However this instruction is not applicable to Municipal concurrent audit institutions. (Director Circular Roc. 
No.54189/78/H1 dated 27th May 1978)  
Note: 
3. a. The head of audit party should give a copy of each objection raised in course of audit either to the 
Executive Authority, if he is available or to the Manager and obtain acknowledgement thereof in the office copy. If the 
Executive Authority gives replies to any of such audit slips, the replies should be considered and the objections dropped 
or suitably modified. On the last day of audit, the head of audit party should send a D.O. letter to the Executive Authority 
list  out the records which were not produced such as Vouchers, M. Books, etc., and request the Executive Authority to 
gather all such items for production at the time of the impending visit of the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit for 
finalising the Audit Report. The Assistant Director during his visit will discuss each audit objection with the Executive 
Authority and take into account their view points before approving the audit objections. The records that are not produced 
at the time of audit if produced at the time of finalising the audit report by the Assistant Director, will be verified and the 
objections dropped or modified, as the case may be. (Director Roc. No.66239/78/C2, dated 6th July 1978)  
 
 Lr. Roc.No.72788/78/C4, dated 22nd July 1978 of the Inspector of Municipalities addressed to all Commissioners 
of Municipalities Lr. Roc. No. I 38097/ Accounts VII-I/78, dated Ist September 1978 of the Director of Rural Development, 
Madras.  
          Concurrent Audit of Municipalities – I.P. Audit: In the Selection Grade and Special Grade Municipalities where 
immediate post audit is done in the Concurrent audit units, vouchers should be obtained from the Accountant soon after 
the payment is made along with the connected records such as Stock Registers, M.Book, files. etc., and checked in audit 
and irregularities/defects, if any, noticed should be communicated to the Executive Authorities in the form of audit slips 
then and there.  
(Vide Director Lr. Rc. No. 77783cl / 80 / dated: 19-9-90)  
 
The Slips may be communicated in duplicate requesting the Executive Authorities to return one copy of the audit 
slip along with his reply. The settlement of these slips may be watched through the register of audit slips issued and the 
audit slips unsettled may be incorporated in the Audit Notes/ Audit Reports issued.  
 
A paragraph with the details of total number of audit slips issued, the losses covered in these slips the amount 
recovered from the persons responsible and the number of slips settled there by in the course of the I.P. audit may also 
be incorporated in the Audit Report to prove the effectiveness of the I.P. Audit system.  
7.3)  AUDIT REPORT-PREPARATION 
  
The number and date of Bank Payment voucher or the date of receipt and particulars of receipts or payments 
should be given in the objection in the Audit  so as to facilitate any further reference to vouchers or chalans later. Great 
care should be taken in arriving at the amount to be placed under objection. The nature of objection should be recorded 
 
65 
in sufficient detail, the reasons for enforcing recovery should be indicated in the objection, the rule or order violated 
should be specified, and the person responsible for loss or illegal payment should be mentioned in the objection. In the 
case of objections or observations regarding the defective maintenance of accounts, incorrect use of forms, suggestion 
for improving the state of finance, or accounts should be made and no amount need be placed under objection.  
 
The comments should be made bringing forth the financial improvements and how the financial position of the 
institution is affected.  
 
The unsatisfactory state of finance may be due to one or more of the following causes:  
a. 
Expenditure in Excess of Receipts: The income derived from taxation and normal sources of revenue should 
ordinarily be sufficient to cover the normal expenditure, except where expenditure is incurred in excess of the 
available means. If normal expenditure exceeds normal receipts, it should be commented upon.  
b. 
Insufficient Taxation: The rates at which taxes are levied may be much below the maximum permissible. The 
sources of income should be examined and suitably commented upon.  
c. 
Slackness in Collection: Paucity of funds in case of Municipal Councils and Panchayats may be due to slackness 
in collection. In regard to taxes, the percentage of collection to demand should be worked out and the actual 
collection compared with the provision in the budget estimates. It should be seen whether the collection of taxes 
and other items of revenue approximated to what was anticipated to be realised in the budget estimates. The 
percentage of collection to demand for the year under audit should be compared with that of the preceding three 
years and suitable comment made.  
d. 
Generous Remissions and Writes-off:  If the amount of remissions and write-off is considerably larger as 
compared with the demand causes therefore should be investigated and suitable comments made.  
 
Budget - Cases in which expenditure was incurred in excess or in the absence of budget provision without 
obtaining the necessary reappropriation by competent authority to cover the expenditure or the excess should be noticed 
in audit. The contents of this paragraph will be as given below:-  
 
The Budget for the year was approved by the competent authorities. The expenditure in excess of budget provision 
as detailed below was noticed during the period under report. Prior approval of (Authorities should be quoted) was not 
obtained for the excess expenditure incurred over and above the budget provision as required by Government in 
Memorandum No. 82682 Budget 167-2 R.D. & L.A., dated 21st July 1967. The ratification for the excess expenditure 
incurred in the excess of and or in the absence of Budget provision may be obtained and shown to audit. The need to 
prepare the budget on a more realistic basis is brought to notice.  
         Summary of Major Irregularities.-  A summary of major objections detailed in the body of the report should be 
given in this paragraph. The paragraph should be arranged in the order in which they were drafted for easy reference.  
 
Defalcation detected by the Executive Authorities and adequately dealt with by them need not be detailed in the 
Audit Report but only a brief abstract of the number, amount and nature of the defalcations may be given. Comments 
should be made if the embezzlements disclose negligence on the part of the staff in not observing the rules. If a 
defalcation was rendered possible by any defect in rules or procedure a suitable paragraph may be included in the 
report. Defalcations noticed in audit should be fully stated in the audit reports.  
 
  The last paragraph should give the total number of objections remaining unsettled and their aggregate amount. 
Details showing the total number and amount of objections should be given in this part of the report. Assuming that the 
audit report is for 20   -  20   the details should be given as below:-  
 
Objections pending settlement: -------Objections involving a sum of Rs.----------- were pending settlement at the 
close of audit as detailed below:-  
Year 
Audit report/Audit 
Paragraph 
Notes 
Particulars 
number 
Amount 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
 
66 
 
In the case of annual audit notes the amount involved in the audit notes including the audit report should be entered 
as last entries in the audit notes giving reference merely to the paragraph numbers in the audit reports to arrive at the 
total amount placed under objection.  
(H.O. Standing Order 44 / 71 / dt.15-7-1971) 
 
An abstract of the total number of objections and the amount involved should be made at the end of the Audit Notes 
for the month or quarter as below:-  
Serial No. 
Paragraph number of Audit Notes 
Amount involved 
1 
2 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total  
 
 
General: . The Audit Reports may be issued with a covering letter addressed to the Executive authority 
concerned . Specimen forms of covering letters in respect of Municipalities, Panchayat Unions and Town Panchayats 
were appended in H.O Circular Roc. No. 47113l/CI/79, dated 19th July 1979.  
 
The audit reports of the institutions whose accounts are finally audited by Assistant Inspectors or by Deputy 
Inspectors of Local Fund Audit should issue in their name.  
i. 
In respect of the institutions the audit of which is done by Assistant Inspectors and reviewed by Deputy Inspector 
the audit reports should issued in the name of the Deputy Inspector.  
ii.  
In respect of the institutions the audit of which is done either by Assistant Inspectors or by Deputy Inspector and 
reviewed by Inspector the audit reports should issued in the name of the Inspector.  
iii. 
With a view to enable the executive authorities of local bodies in office to fix responsibility for any loss or irregularity 
pointed out in the audit report immediately on its receipt by him the following particulars should be furnished in the 
objections:  
a. 
 Time barred Arrears of Fees: It should be indicated in the objection, whether the executive authority has issued 
any instructions for recovery of the time-barred arrears soon after the close of the year and the recoveries so 
ordered and above pointed out. Otherwise, the amounts for which each Bill Collector or Revenue Inspector is 
responsible should be pointed out. It should also be indicated if the Bill Collectors have reported to the higher 
authority regarding the reasons for non-collection and whether action has been taken in the office as per rules for 
collection of taxes. It should also be indicated if the instructions issued in G.O. Ms. No.4 I 9, Rural Development 
and Local Administration, dated 23rd February 1974, have been followed in the case of Municipalities for realisation 
of taxes. Then the negligence of the staff responsible for such arrears should be pin pointed and made mention in 
the objection.  
b. 
Lease Amounts  Arrears etc. : It should be clearly indicated in the objection whether agreement were taken, 
whether adequate security deposit, have been taken whether in respect of arrears, action was taken in accordance 
with the condition of agreement and whether suit cost fixed before the arrears became time-barred. If not, the 
executive authority responsible for the above lapses should be mentioned. In the non-enforcement of the conditions 
of lease, will ultimately result in realising the arrears, it is necessary to indicate in each year report commencing 
from the year in which the lease came into effect that continuing responsibility of Executive Authority.  
c. 
Bills for Services Rendered:  In respect of water supply, apart from the general responsibility for the non-
realisation of arrears before they became time-barred, responsibility lies on the executive authority to disconnect 
services for non-payments as per by-laws. Failure in this regard the name of the executive authority responsible 
should be mentioned in the audit report.  
d. 
Payments:  Excess or irregular payments may be caused due to mistake in calculation or irregular decision by the 
Executive authority.   
 
67 
 
1.  
In regard to excess payment in respect of works due to wrong calculations or measurements, the name and 
designation of the Officer who has measured and check measured the works should be mentioned. The name 
of the Accountant who failed to check them at the time of passing the bill should also be noted.  
 
2.  
In regard to excess payments for supplies of articles due to incorrect calculation, the persons responsible for 
the failure to check the bills should be noted in the objections. 
e. 
Omission in Assessment of taxes, Fees:  In regard to  Municipalities and Town Panchayat, cases omitted but 
subsequently found out, the bill Collectors and Revenue Inspectors, who are responsible for the detection of new 
cases should be held responsible and their names noted in the objection. In regard to license fees, it is the 
responsibility of the Sanitary Inspector to scrutinise list of persons carrying on the trades and also to find out places 
where trades are conducted without license and take action. Hence if omission are noticed in this regard, the 
names of Sanitary Inspectors responsible should be mentioned.  
f. 
Time-barred Advances:  Advances are granted for specific purposes. They should have been refunded or 
adjusted by rendering accounts. Hence in respect of advances pending the executive authority or persons 
responsible for the omission to effect the recoveries in time should be mentioned.  
g. 
 Non-production of Records:  Name and designation of the persons who failed to produce the records should be 
pin pointed. Before this, records should be called for in writing by special notices (orders). The above instructions 
are only illustrative. As it will enable the executive euthority in office to take action promptly, the names of the 
persons should be given in the objection as far as possible.  
h. 
 In cases of involving defalcation of municipal funds, shortages of stores, etc., the names of Bill Collectors, Shroff 
and persons incharge of stores etc., should be pointed out.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 823. M.A. & W.S. Dept., Dated 20-8-87) 
 iv.  Along with the copy of the Audit Report, sent to the municipal Council, one copy of the audited annual accounts in 
the case of audit report relating to the Revenue Fund  and two copies of the accounts in the case of audit report 
relating to Elementary Education Fund Account should be enclosed. In the case of some of the other accounts such 
as those of the Local Library authorities, Town Panchayats, disabled boatmen fund, etc., the annual accounts have 
to be checked and enclosed to the audit reports.  
v.  
The annual audit of  Municipalities and  Town Panchayat  involves   detailed examination  of Trial Balance , Income 
and Expenditure statement and scrutiny of the statement of assets and liabilities. The results of the examination, 
should be incorporated in Part-I of the report.  
vi.  
Large tabular statements should not be included in the body of the audit report but should when necessary appear 
as annexure thereto. To avoid duplication of work, the required number of copies of annexure or enclosures to audit 
reports, if any,  should be  prepared at the  same time and sent along with the draft audit report.  
vii. 
A docket sheet in a form prescribed in L.F. (A3) 4727, dated 29th March 1967 as amended should be attached to 
the Draft Audit Report.  
 
In addition to the docket sheet  work allocation chart prescribed in Examiner‘s circular Roc. No. C4-40715175-1, 
dated 19th July 1975, should be added to each Audit Report in which the final distribution of work should be appended 
and the auditors should   sign in full against such of the items actually  done by them.  
viii. In cases where paragraphs are deleted from or new paragraphs added on, to an audit report or the paragraphs 
rearranged by the Assistant Director, the necessary correction should be carried out in the special letters and Audit 
notes.  
ix.  
The draft audit reports should be accompanied by the following statements in addition to those referred to above: 
IRREGULARITIES IN THE DRAWAL AND UTILISATION OF GRANTS 
 
The statement showing the irregularities in the drawal and utilisation of grants should be compiled in the form 
prescribed below:  
(Director Circular Roc. No. F3/20332179, dated 3rd May 1979)  
1) 
 Statement showing the irregularities in the drawl and utilisation of grants.  
 
68 
 
(The usage of the term ―Over drawl of grant‖ should be dispensed with while making comments in the Audit Reports 
about the irregularities in the drawl and utilisation of grants.  
(Director Circular Roc. No. 96625/E3177. dated 14th October 1977.)  
2) 
a statement showing education tax realised under Tamil Nadu Elementary Education Act 1920 by the Municipality, 
on which equivalent contribution is due.  
3) 
a gist of points for inclusion in the brief note to be submitted to Government.  
4) 
a statement showing the Maternity and Child Welfare grant due in the case of Municipality in the rescribed form.  
5) 
A statement in respect of check of claim for compost subsidy (Municipalities).  
6) 
A certificate regarding delay in disbursement of non-recurring grants.  
  
The audit report will be scrutinized and passed by the Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit except where the 
Inspector or Deputy Inspector has been specifically authorized to approve Audit Reports.  
Maintenance of Audit Report Files:   
I. 
 After issue of Audit Report, it should be stitched with a docket sheet along with the annual account and other 
documents such as Overdrawl statement and other annexure. This will form Volume I of Audit Report.  
ii. 
Another Volume (i.e.) Volume II shall be opened for correspondence and for issue of further remarks.  
 
 Issue of Further Remarks:  As soon as replies are received for the audit notes, the replies will be scrutinised by 
the Assistant Inspector responsible for disposal. Such of the items, as have been satisfactorily explained, cases in which 
recoveries have been effected and cases in which requisite sanction has been obtained should be admitted after 
verifying credits, sanction, etc., the fact of admission being noted in the audit notes with relevant authority or the reasons. 
In other cases, suitable comments should be made and communicated to the Executive Authority of the local body as 
further remarks. Replies to the further remarks should be dealt with in the same manner as replies to audit notes. Audit 
notes should be closed only after all the objections have been settled. The further remarks issued should be filed along 
with the audit notes .  
Note: 
1. In the case of Panchayat Unions, the replies will sent by the Commissioner to the Collector in duplicate with 
the resolution of the council approving the replies with an advance copy of the replies to audit. The Collector in turn will 
forward the replies to audit with his remarks, if any. On receipt of replies, further remarks in the form of a letter will be 
issued to the Commissioner.  
Note: 
2. In the case of Municipalities and Town Panchayats, however, the replies will be received from the Executive 
Authority direct and further remarks issued after scrutiny of the replies. 
 
The responsibility for the removal of objections and the settlement of other points raised in audit devolves primarily 
upon the executive authorities of the Local bodies concerned, and heads of other institutions. To assist the Government 
and other departmental controlling authorities in the maintenance of a proper system of accounts, the Local Fund Audit 
Department has to maintain a constant and careful watch over objections and keep Government and other controlling 
authorities fully acquainted not only with the financial and accounts irregularities noticed in audit reports but also with the 
progress of clearance of objections. The Government Lr. G.O. Ms. No. 691, Rural Development and Local 
Administration, dated 2nd March 1971 have ordered that the recurring excess payment objected to by audit should be 
stopped at once. It should be resumed only on receipt of specific orders from the competent authority based on the merit 
of the objections. The Assistant Director and Regional Deputy Director should examine the above aspect during their 
inspection of local bodies. (G.O. Ms. No. 691, Rural Development and Local Administration, dated 2nd March 1971)  
 Amendments to Audit Report : 
Adenda or amendments  to the Audit Report should be issued with in six months 
from the date of approval of Audit Report. In the cases where amendments or adenda have to be issued after the above 
time limit, the specific approval of the Director shall be obtained. (H.O.R.F. 7 / 51951 / CC1 / 90, dated 21-12-1990)  
Closure of Audit Reports : 
 
If all the objections in Audit Notes/Audit Reports are settled, the Audit Notes/ 
 
Audit Reports may be closed without waiting for the formal replies to AudiThe Audit Reports / 
 
69 
         Notes may be closed in K.Dis. 
(Director Lr. K.Dis. No. 78514/76/04, dated 2nd September 1976)  
 7.4)  DUE DATES FOR SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL ACCOUNTS AND COMPLETION OF AUDIT 
 
Government have prescribed the following Time frame for submission of annual Accounts by local bodies and for 
completion of audit by LFAD and for the further action to be taken by the local bodies. 
Name of 
Institution 
Due date for 
Submission of 
Annual 
Accounts 
Due date for 
Issue of Audit 
Report by 
LFAD 
Due date for 
Placing the 
Audit Report 
Before the 
council 
Fixing 
Responsibi- 
lity of 
Initiating 
Disciplinary 
Action and 
Surcharge 
proceedings 
Completion 
of 
Disciplinary 
Action/ 
Effecting 
recovery 
Authority 
Corporation 
30th June of the 
succeeding year 
15th September 
Two months 
from the date 
of issue or 
15th Nov. 
which ever is 
earlier 
31st  
December 
31st March 
G.O.Ms.No.145 
MA&WS 
Dt.22.10.02and 
G.O.83 MAWS 
dt.1.6.2009 
Municipality 
15th May 
― 
― 
― 
― 
― 
Town 
Panchayat 
30th April 
― 
― 
― 
― 
― 
Pt.Union 
15th May 
― 
― 
― 
― 
G.O.Ms.No.142 
RD Dept., 
Dt.15.10.02 
District 
Panchayat 
― 
― 
― 
― 
― 
― 
Local Library 
Authority 
15th May 
One year from 
the receipt of A/c 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
University 
30th June 
A month from the 
Receipts of A/c 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
7.5) SETTLEMENT OF PENDING OBJECTIONS 
 
The power to settle the pending objections on receipt of replies from the executive authorities vests with the 
Assistant Director and Regional Deputy Director of LFAD. 
 
On receipt of the reply, the Asst. Director should in due course  verify the reply along with the relevant records and 
ensure  (i). The correctness of the reply and (ii). The rectification of the defects pointed out is in order.  On settlement of 
the objection necessary further remarks should be issued.  The Assistant Director can settle the special letter paras and 
paras on which special reports were sent by Regional Deputy Director after due verification of the records and after 
satisfying that the loss has been made good beyond doubt.  However Assistant Directors are not empowered to relieve a 
person from an objection without the prior approval of the Regional Deputy Director. 
 
Usually Joint Sittings are conducted for settlement of objections relating to Corporation, Municipalities and 
Panchayat Unions with the participation of Regional Deputy Directors  and Assistant Directors at District.  Town 
Panchayats joint sittings are held by the Asst. Directors.  Monthly joint sittings should be arranged by the Asst. Director 
and Regional Deputy Directors in consultation with the Administrative authorities and it should be ensured that due 
progress is achieved in the settlement of objections during every month in each district. 
RULES FOR ADMISSION OF OBJECTION BY OFFICERS OF LOCAL FUND AUDIT DEPARTMENT 
 
Delegation of Financial Powers to admit excessive or irregular expenditure / waiver of recoveries in cases where 
the amounts found irrecoverable are enhanced as specified below. 
Sl. No. 
 
  
   Designation   
 
          Enhanced waiver power monetary limit 
 
70 
2. 
Director of Local Fund Audit / Chief Internal Auditor   
 
    Rs.750.00 
3. 
Joint Director of Local Fund Audit / Internal Audit  
                   Rs.600.00 
 
 
4. 
Deputy Director of Local Fund Audit / Internal Audit   
                  Rs. 500.00 
5. 
Assistant Director of Local Fund Audit / Internal Audit                          Rs.400.00 
6. 
Inspector of Local Fund Audit / Internal Audit   
                                Rs.200.00 
                                                                                
 
(G.O. Ms. No.150 Finance (LF) Dept. dt:15-2-1994) 
  
Some items are placed under objection, not because the whole or any portion of the expenditure is unjustifiable in 
itself but because it is not exactly covered by rule, or the authority for it is insufficient or full proof, such as is afforded by 
sub-vouchers, that it has been incurred has not been produced. In such cases, the Director of Local Fund Audit may 
forego recovery upto a limit of  Rs.750 in each case,  
 
The expenditure must not be of a recurring nature.  
 
The power conferred on the Inspectors, the Assistant Directors and the Deputy Examiners for waiver of recoveries 
should be exercised judicially and not as a matter of course irrespective of the nature of the objection and to be within 
their powers. The waiver should be made where recovery of the amount objected is proved impossible in view of the fact 
that persons responsible might have left service or died or when such course is not economical due to protracted 
correspondence, etc. This should also ascertain whether special  report  was issued on the objection before dropping 
any objection. If  special report had been issued, the waiver power should not be enforced.  
(Director Circular Roc.No.H3/5240S/76-S, dated 31 August 1976).  
7.6  HIGH LEVEL COMMITTEE 
 
Having in mind the accumulation of pending audit objections year by year and in order to settle the long pending 
objections relating to retiring and retired local body officers and employees, Government have constituted High level 
committees for settlement of objections at State and District levels vesting certain powers to the committee. 
 
 
 
Sl. No.   
 
Institutions   
 
 
            Authority 
  1.  
Chennai Corporation  
 
 
 G.O. Ms. No. 184/MA&WS Dept. dt:14-9-1998 
  2.              All other Corporations and Municipalities   G.O. Ms. No. 65/MA&WS Dept. dt:22-5-2007 
                                                                                      G.O.Ms.No.54 MAWS Dept., dt.30.3.09 
  3.  
Town Panchayats   
 
 
G.O. Ms. No. 1/MA&WS Dept. dt:4-1-2007 
  4.  
Panchayat Unions   
 
 
G.O. Ms. No. 324/MA&WS Dept. dt:13-11-97 
 
   
The details of the committee members and the power vested with the committee have been clearly narrated in the 
respective Government orders. 
I) 
High Level Committee for Municipality 
 
The power to settle long pending audit objections relating to municipal councils has been entrusted to a committee 
with the following composition for each District / State. 
Sl. No 
Designation   
District level Committee    
State level Committee 
1 
Chairman   
Financial Advisor in the Office of  the 
Director  of Municipal Administration / 
Additional 
Director 
of 
Municipal 
Director of Municipal                        
Administration 
 
 
71 
Administration (in the absence of FA) 
2 
Vice Chairman   
Regional Deputy Director of Local 
Fund Audit  (for Municipalities) /    
Deputy Director  of the concerned     
Corporation Audit. 
 
 
 
Director of Local Fund Audit 
 
3 
Members  (Engineering wing)  
 a) Regional Executive Engineer 
 (for  Municipalities) 
b) City Engineer (for Corporations) 
c) Executive Engineer (corporations) 
(where there are no post of City 
Engineer.) 
Chief  Engineer O/o The Director   
of Municipal Administration or 
Superintending Engineer,  
O/o The Director  
                                                        
of Municipal Administration 
(in the absence of Chief Engineer 
4 
Member 
 a) Commissioners of concerned 
Municipalities. 
b) Commissioners of concerned 
Corporations 
c) Asst. Commissioners of Zones in 
Corporations – Special invitees 
                                  . 
Regional Director of Municipal 
Administration (for Municipalities  
 
Commissioners of concerned 
Corporations 
5 
Member Secretary 
Regional Director of Municipal 
Administration (for Municipalities) 
Asst. Commissioners (Accounts)      
for Corporations. 
Financial Advisor in the Office of  
the 
Director 
 
of 
Municipal 
Administration 
 
 
 Function of the District Level Committee:  The committee is a non statutory one intended to facilitate disposal 
off audit objections relating to Municipal Councils.  The Committee will meet atleast once in three months to dispose off 
the pending audit objections. 
 
The Committee may direct the commissioners to appear before the committee for enquiries / additional explanation 
if any. 
 
The committee may examine in detail regarding the reported irregularities and pass final orders on all audit 
objections. 
a. 
enforcing a full or token recovery 
b. 
waiving recovery or excess payments 
c. 
condoning the irregularity on the merits of each case  
d. 
In the case of an objection requiring Government condonation the committee can recommend for the 
condonation.  
e. 
Giving suitable direction to the present Executive officers / commissioner to take action on the audit 
requirement. 
f. 
The committee may not examine the audit objections raised by the Accountant General and the cases under 
vigilance enquiry. 
g. 
The committee may also recommend and suggest to take further action by the Director of Municipal 
Administration. 
 
72 
 
Functions of the State Level Committee: The State level Committee shall meet not less than two times in a year 
to supervise the functions of the District  Level Committee. 
 
The Committee shall,  examine audit objections settled by the District Level Committee and finalise the  undisposed 
objections. 
 
Examine all the audit objections relating to Municipal Corporations except Chennai. 
 
In the case of audit objections relating to Commissioner of Municipal Administration,  he as a member may explain 
the position before the committee and do not recommend for dropping of audit objection.  He shall allow members and 
chairman to discuss and take final decision. (G.O. Rt. 65 M.A. & W.S (MA.5) Dept.  dt:22-5-2007) (G.O.Ms.No.54 MAWS 
(MA5) Dept., 30.3.09) 
II) 
Panchayat Union High Level Committee  : 
The power to settle long pending audit objections relating to 
Panchayat Union Councils has been entrusted to a committee with the following composition for each districts. 
           District Level      
 
 
                                         State Level 
 1. 
Chairman                  District Collector     
                Director of Rural Development 
 
 2. 
Vice-Chairman   
Project Officer,  District 
 
 Director of Local Fund Audit 
 
 
 
 
Rural Development Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. 
Member   
 
Regional Deputy Director of               Financial Advisor cum Chief Accounts 
 
 
 
 
Local Fund Audit   
                Officer in the Office of Director of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                Rural Development.  As a member  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 secretary he will arrange for the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  convening of the meeting of the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  committee. 
 
 4. 
Member   
 
Executive Engineer  
                Chief Engineer / Superintending. 
 
 
 
 
Rural Development  
                Engineer TWAD Board. 
 
 
 
              attached to DRDA.  
 
 5. 
Member   
 
Asst. Director / Accounts                  Chief Engineer or a nominee from 
 
 
 
 
Officer in DRD Office.    
                Highways & Rural Development Dept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 6. 
Member   
 
Asst. Director (Audit),  
 
  Asst. Director (Audit) 
 
 
 
 
Rural Development in Collectorate    Rural Development of the 
 
 
 
 
(As a member, Secretary, he will  
  concerned District. 
 
 
 
 
arrange for the convening of the  
 
 
 
 
meeting of the committee) 
 
  
 
Functions of the Committee: The High level committee, may be convened at the district level once in two months 
and the State committee may supervise the functions of the District level High level committees and dispose of the un 
disposed audit objection. 
 
The Block Development Officer / Development Officers may be directed to appear before the High level Committee 
for further enquires and depose their explanations for further examination. 
 
The Regional Deputy Director of Local Fund Audit, will place before the committees, his report summorising the 
irregularities noticed during the audit of panchayat union councils for further examination and pass final orders. 
 
Enforcing a full or token recovery 
 
Waiving the recovery or excess payment 
 
Condoning the irregularities on the merits of each case. 
 
In the case of an objection requiring Government condonation, the committee may recommend for condo nation. 
 
Giving suitable directions to the present commissioners to take action on the audit requirements. 
 
The committee is a non-statutory one intended to facilitate disposal of audit objections relating to panchayat union 
Councils. 
 
73 
 
The committee may examine only the irregularities reported by the Director of Local Fund Audit. 
 
The audit objections raised by the Accountant General and cases reported and under investigation by the vigilance 
and Anti corruption Department may not be examined. 
 
The Assistant Director (Audit) Rural Development will act as a Co-coordinator 
 
As per G.O. Rt. No.519 / Fin (Salaries) Dept. dt: 29-9-97 the approval of Finance Department need not be insisted. 
(G.O. RT. No.324 / RD (c3) Dept. Dt.13-11-97) 
 
Final Orders  on Already Passed Cases Need not be Re-examined: The Past cases on which final orders  have 
been already passed on audit objections enforcing a full or token recovery by the High Level Committee may not be re-
examined in subsequent High Level Committee Meetings.  It is against the instructions issued in G.O. Rt. No.324 / RD 
(C3) Dept.  dt: 13-11-94.  In such cases the Regional Deputy Director of Local Fund Audit may register their objections 
during H.L.C. meetings besides bringing to the notice of the Head Office. 
(Head Office standing order No.10/05 issued in circular Roc. No.23333 / QLR / 2005 dt:4-7-2005) 
 
The entire DCRG amount may be released to the retired commissioners to whom no disciplinary case is pending 
against them. 
 
The Disciplinary  proceedings may be initiated against the commissioners in the case of any deficiency or loss or 
unprofitable outlay incurred by the negligence or misconduct of that person  
G.O. No.87 RD Dept. dt:7-9-1999. 
 
As per the orders issued in G.O. Ms. 247 R.D. Dept. 20-4-89 the 25% withheld amount of D.C.R.G. from the retired 
commissioners of Panchayat unions may be released to them in the cases where there is no pending Disciplinary 
charges. 
(D.R.D‘ s  Letter ROC No.40385 / V6 / 99-2  Dt:11-02-2000) 
 
 
 
 
III) 
 Town Panchayat High Level Committee at District / State Level:   
 
 The power to settle long pending audit objections relating to Town Panchayats has been entrusted to a Committee 
with the following composition for each District / State level. 
District High Level Committee 
 
 
District Collector    
 
 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
Regional Deputy Director of Local fund Audit    
 
Member 
 
 
Divisional Engineer (Highways)  
 
 
 
Member 
 
 
Executive Engineer  (TWAD Board)  
 
 
Member  
 
 
District Health Officer  
 
 
 
 
Member 
 
 
Account Officer (Directorate of Town Panchayats)   
Member 
 
 
Regional Assistant Director (Town Panchayats)   
 
Member and Coordinator 
State High Level Committee 
 
 
 
Director of Town Panchayats   
 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
Director of Local Fund Audit   
 
 
 
Vice Chairman 
 
74 
 
 
Executive Engineer (Directorate of Town Panchayats)   
Member 
 
 
Executive Engineer (TWAD Board)  
 
 
Member  
 
 
Joint Director (Public Health Rural Department)  
 
Member 
 
 
Accounts Officer (Directorate of Town Panchayats)  
Member and Coordinator 
 
 
Object: The long pending audit objections relating to Town Panchayats and audit objections pending against the 
retired or retiring Executive Officers shall be disposed off. 
 
Functions: The Committee is a non statutory one intended to facilitate disposal of audit objections relating to Town 
Panchayats.  The Committees shall meet once in a month or once in two months. 
 
The Executive Officers concerned are to explain the position before the committee. 
 
The placement of audit objections before the committee may be informed well in advance to the retiring and retired 
Executive Officers and direct them to appear before the Committee to depose their explanation if any. 
 
The report on serious irregularities may also be placed before the Committee to examine. 
 
The loss sustained shall also be ordered to be recovered at the following rates: 
         Sl.No. 
             Designation 
 
                           Percentage to be recovered 
 
i.   Executive Officer   
 
 
 
 
 
20% 
 
ii . Assistant Engineer / Assistant Executive Engineer  
 
               40 
 
iii. Head clerk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
iv. Clerk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
         v. In the absence of the post of Head clerk the Clerk is held responsible  
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Condoning the irregularities on merits of each case. 
 
In the case of an objection requiring Govt condonation, the Committee can recommend the condonation, 
 
Giving suitable directions to the present Executive Officers to take action on the audit requirements. 
 
The irregularities committed by the Executive Authorities during their entire period as reported by the Director of                        
          Local Fund Audit may also be examined. 
 
 
The unsettled objections at District level may also be examined. 
 
The committee shall examine the audit objections other than the cases under vigilance for enquiry. 
 
The committee shall not reexamine the cases for which orders were already passed. 
State High Level Committee:   
 
The State High Level Committee shall supervise the functions of the District High Level Committee apart from 
examining the undisposed audit objections. 
 
The procedures prescribed  at the district level may be followed. 
 
75 
(G.O. Rt. No.1, MA & WS (T.pt.2) department dt:4-1-2007) 
 
Where the objection is based on insufficiency of sanction, the Director of Local Fund Audit must be satisfied that the 
authority empowered to sanction the expenditure would accord sanction if requested to do so.  
  
Where the objection is based in insufficiency of proof of payment, the Director of Local Fund Audit must be satisfied 
that undue trouble would not be caused by insistence on submission of full proof and must see no reason to doubt that 
the charge has actually been paid.  
 
Where expenditure under objection has for any reason become irrecoverable, an Audit Officer of rank not lower 
than that of Deputy Director of Local Fund Audit may write-off an amount not exceeding Rs. l00  in each case.  
Note: The powers conferred upon the Director of Local Fund Audit under the foregoing provisions of this Article are 
independent of the powers be can exercise in the matter of dropping surcharge proceedings under G.0.Ms.No.3145, L & 
M, dated 4th August1930 as amended.  
        Audit once closed cannot be re-opened in the case of local bodies:-   If in respect of other institutions or in 
case of local bodies for the years for which the audit of accounts has not been closed, payments on account of personal 
claims are placed under objection for more than a year after the date on which they are disbursed, the Director of Local 
Fund Accounts should before demanding recovery refer the matter for the orders of the Government in the department 
concerned. The Director of Local Fund Audit, may however, forego recovery himself if the amount involved does not 
exceed Rs.100/-  and he is satisfied that it was drawn by the claimant concerned under a reasonable belief that he was 
entitled to it.  
 
The audit may suggest token recovery.  
(Director Lr. K. Dis.63189/87/SPO/Dt:11th August 1987)  
7.7)  The Tamil Nadu Panchayats Surcharge (Disallowance and Charge) Rules 2000 
 
Surcharge and Disallowance:  Any auditor, empowered by the Government, shall carefully and personally 
examine every case of loss or waste or misapplication of money or property of the Village Panchayat or Panchayat union 
or District Panchayat and may disallow every item contrary to law and surcharge the same on the person making or 
authorising the making of illegal payments and may charge against any person responsible therefore the amount of any 
deficiency, loss or unprofitable outlay incurred by the negligence or misconduct of that person or of any sum, which ought 
to have been, but is not brought to account by that person and shall, in every such case, certify the amount due from 
such person. 
 
It shall not be open to an executive authority of village panchayat or commissioner of panchayat union or secretary 
of district panchayat whose negligence or misconduct has caused or contributed to any such deficiency or loss, to 
contend that not withstanding his negligence or misconduct the deficiency or loss would not have occurred but for the 
negligence or misconduct of some other person. 
 
Power of the Government: The Government prescribe the following officers to exercise the powers referred 
to in these rules in respect of the funds of every Village Panchayat or Panchayat Union or District Panchayat 
within his jurisdiction. 
        a. 
Assistant Director of  Rural Development (Panchayats) in case of village panchayats (General Funds) 
b. 
Director of Local Fund Audit in case of District Panchayats, Panchayat Union councils and Village 
Panchayats. (Scheme Funds). 
 
The auditor shall state in writing the reasons for his decision in respect of every disallowance which shall be based 
on a stated authority in respect of every disallowance, surcharge or charge and furnish by registered post, a copy thereof 
to the person against whom it is made. 
 
Even if the person to whom a copy of the decision of the auditor is furnished, refuses to receive it, he shall be 
deemed to have been duly furnished with a copy of such decision within the meaning of sub-rule (2).  The period of 30 
days fixed in rules 5 and 6 shall be calculated form the date of such refusal. 
 
76 
 
Issue of Surcharge Certificate: The auditor who is empowered to issue a surcharge certificate, before issuing a 
surcharge certificate, shall give a show cause notice to the person concerned calling upon him to state his defence about 
the proposed notice in writing within a specified time which shall not be less than 15 days.  If such person desires to be 
heard in person, the opportunity of personal hearing shall be given by the auditor.  In such a personal hearing the auditor 
shall record the proceedings of such hearing. The auditor shall issue surcharge certificate after taking into consideration 
the representation, if any given by the person concerned and the proceedings by the personal hearing.  The show cause 
notice and the surcharge certificate shall be in Tamil version. 
 
Wherever the Collector, the Inspector or other competent authority takes execution proceedings on behalf of a 
Village Panchayat, Panchayat Union Council or District Panchayat in respect of which a surcharge certificate has been 
issued by an auditor, the expenditure for such purpose shall be met from the Govt. initially and recovered from the funds 
of the respective Village Panchayat, Panchayat Union or District Panchayat. 
 
Appeal against the Surcharge, Disallowance or Charge: Any person, aggrieved by the disallowance, surcharge 
or charge made, within thirty days from the date of the receipt of service of the decision of the auditor, appeal to the 
Inspector, or any officer authorised by the Government in this behalf to set aside such disallowance, surcharge or charge 
and the Inspector or such officer, after taking such evidence as is necessary, may confirm, modify or remit such 
disallowance, surcharge or charge. 
 
Provided that the Inspector or any officer authorised by the Govt. may admit an appeal after the expiry of the time 
specified in this sub-rule, but within 60 days if the appellant satisfies the Inspector or such officer that he has sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within the specified time.  Provided further that during the pendancy of the appeal 
made under rule, the certificate of disallowance, surcharge or charge, as the case may be shall not be enforced. 
 
Against the order of the Inspector or Officer authorised by Government in this behalf under sub-rule(1), a second 
appeal shall be to the Government within 30 days from the date of receipt of such order, the Government may take into 
account all the fact present by the appellant and facts of the case and pass such order as they deem fit and proper.  
Against the order of the Government an appeal shall be to the High Court within 30 days from the date of receipt of such 
order. 
 
Where an appeal is made to the High Court under sub-rule (2) the auditor shall be the sole respondent thereto and 
the applicant shall not be entitled to make either the Inspector or any officer authorised by the Government or any other 
person of Government a party to the proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
Payment of dues: Every sum certified to be due from any person by the auditor under these rules shall be paid by 
such person into the bank or post office in which the funds of the village panchayat, panchayat union council or district 
panchayat, as the case may be, are lodged within 30 days from the date of intimation to him of the decision of the auditor 
unless within that time, such person has appealed against the decision to the Inspector or any officer authorised by the 
Government and such sum, if not paid or such sum as the Inspector or such officer shall declare to be due, shall be 
recoverable in the same way as an amount decreed by a court by filing execution petition. 
 
Charge of Interest on Surcharge, Disallowance or Charge Amount:  Interest at the rate specified by the 
Government from time to time, by general or special order or if no such order is in current at the time of issuing a 
surcharge certificate at a rate not less than fifteen percent per annum shall be charged on the amount of disallowance.  
Surcharge or charge due with effect from the day following the last date fixed for payment of the said amount of 
disallowance, surcharge or charge in the certificate.  The interest so charged on the amount of disallowance, surcharge 
or charge, over due shall be specified in the certificate itself in precise terms as laid down in section 34 of the Civil 
Procedure Code 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) 
 
 
77 
 
Waiving of Amount of Disallowance, Surcharge or Charge: Notwithstanding anything contained in the rule, the 
Government may at any time direct that the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount of disallowance, surcharge 
or charge certified to be due from any person by the auditor under these rules shall be waived if, in their opinion that 
such a course is necessary, considering all the circumstances of the case.  The reasons for such waiver shall be 
conveyed in writing to the Village Panchayat or Panchayat Union or District Panchayat, as the case may be. 
 
7.8) PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS IN THE COURT OF LAW:  
 
In the cases where requisition from Court of law are received for production of documents like bills, vouchers pay 
orders, etc., in court the previous orders of the Director should be obtained in good time before complying with such 
requisitions. In urgent cases, the officers concerned may pass orders directing production of records to court in 
anticipation of the orders of the Director and get it ratified.  
(Director LF Audit Circular L.F. (PlJ) W682, dated 18th October 1965.)  
7.9) RELEASE OF ORIGINAL RECORDS FOR INVESTIGATION PURPOSES:   
 
When the investigating officer feel that the investigation cannot proceed on copies of documents including 
Photostat copies, he has to move the Director of Local Fund Audit through the Inspector-General of Police for original 
records.  
 
Whenever requests are received from the investigating officers through the Inspector-General of Police for the 
release of original records of this department for investigation purposes, the original records should be released to the 
investigating officers-after taking Photostat copies for office records. The Photostat copies have to be retained in the 
concerned  office of Assistant Director LF Audit till the receipt back of the original records from the investigating officers.  
 
Arrangements for taking Photostat copies have to be made by this department and for this purpose Government 
have authorised the Director LF Audit in G.M. No. I 73490/Fin. (Codes)173-7, dated 8th August 1974 to enter into ontract 
and sign agreement with the private photographer.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 212, Finance, dated 18th February 1963. O.M. 83320/EII/66-13, Fin. dated 27th April 1967.  
G.M. 48527/Fin/76-4, dated 4th October 1976.)  
(Director LF Audit Circular Rc. No. 99699/76·D5. dated 19th November 1976.)  
 
As the office copy of the Audit Report as submitted by the Inspector of Local Fund Audit is corrected, modified, 
amplified wherever necessary and finally approved by the Assistant Director and is generally in bad shape, it may not be 
desirable to hand over it for investigation and filing in the court. A typed copy of the Audit Report signed by Assistant 
Director or Deputy Director who approved the Audit Report can be treated as original and will be acceptable by the 
investigating authority for production in the Court. Hence a typed copy of the audit report duly signed by the Assistant 
Director / Deputy Director who approved the Audit Report may be kept in the audit office along with Audit Report file and 
the same produced to the Investigating Authority Whenever they ask for the original copy of the Audit Report.  
In the cases where the Audit Report itself or its author is the subject matter of investigation the original manuscript of 
Audit Report shall be made available to the investigating officer on proper requisition through the Inspector-General of 
Police.  
(Director LF Audit Letter Rc. No. 43878 / 78 / C1, dated 6th December 1978) and  
(Rc. No. 18196/79-1, C1, dated 22nd March 1979) 
8. 
 FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTORATE OF LOCAL FUND AUDIT 
 
The audit activities  of the subordinate offices are monitored in the Directorate of Local Fund Audit.  
 
The following audit sections carry out the functions mentioned against them. 
Section 
Function 
Controlling Officer 
Municipal 
Audit 
Section 
1. Approval of draft Audit Reports 
of  all Municipal Corporations. 
Asst Director (Municipal Audit) 
Joint Director. 
 
78 
2. Review of Audit Reports of all 
Municipalities. 
9. 
Review of State of Audit of Corporations and 
Municipalities. 
10. Approval of  Tour Programme and Diary of  RDDs. 
Town 
Panchayat 
Audit 
Section 
1.Review of Audit Reports of all 
Town Panchayats 
2. Sending D.O. Progress Report 
to Government. 
3.Review of State of Audit of Town Panchayats 
Asst Director (P.U. Audit) 
Deputy Director 
Panchayat 
Union 
Audit 
Section 
 
1.Review of Audit Reports of all  
     Panchayat 
Unions 
/District 
Panchayat 
and 
Village 
Panchayat 
2.Review of State of Audit of  
Panchayat Unions /District Panchayat and Village Panchayat 
Asst Director (P.U. Audit) 
Deputy Director 
 
FUNCTIONS OTHER THAN AUDIT 
 
The following functions are also carried out by the Directorate of Local Fund Audit in addition to the audit functions.  
1. 
Authorisation and disbursement of Pensionery benefits to  Local Body Employees  
 
The  certification, sanction and payment of  retirement/death benefits to the employees of  Municipalities, 
Panchayat Unions and Town Panchayat  is administered    by the Directorate of Local Fund Audit. The pensioners are 
receiving monthly pension through four nationalised banks.  
 
As per G.O.Ms.No.93 RD (CIII) Dept. dt.26.3.97 Pension Contribution shall be adjusted from the State Finance 
Commission fund. w.e.& 31.3.97 and G.O.Ms.No. 109 MA&WS Dept dt.3.5.97 
 
The requirement  of funds  for payment of monthly pension and retirement benefits  to the local body employees  
are received from the respective heads of the departments from the devolution of funds alloted to the local bodies. The 
retirement benefits are settled then and there promptly by this Department. 
 
In respect of Municipal Corporations and Universities, audit certificates for retirement benefits are being issued by 
the respective residential audit units of this department based on which pension payments are made by the respective 
institutions from their Funds. 
 
 
 
 
2. Administration of Municipal Pensioners Health and Family Security Fund Scheme: 
 
   
The Health Fund Scheme and Family Security Fund scheme applicable to Govt. pensioners was extended to 
municipal pensioners in Go.Ms.No. 1200/MAWS Dept, Dt 25-5-99 with effect from 1-8-99.  These two schemes are 
administered by the Director of Local Fund Audit.   
3. 
SANCTION OF  INTEREST ON  PROVIDENT FUND BALANCES AND DEPOSITS OF LOCAL BODY 
EMPLOYEES: 
 
The  Provident Fund  Deposits of Local Body Employees and investments thereon were taken over by Government  
from 1967.  The Director of Local Fund Audit is authorised to sanction interest on the balance of Provident Fund Deposits 
of local bodies.   Necessary  authorization for payment is  made   on receipt of  claims from the  Local Bodies.  
