 
 
1 
 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION TO RAILWAY AUDIT MANUAL  
1. BACKGROUND  
The purpose of the Railway Audit  Manual  is to facilitate  an Auditor  to carry out 
Audit of various activities  of Railway organization . The 5th edition  of the Railway 
Audit Manual, (RAM ) presently in use, was issued in May 2001.  A need was felt 
to revise/update it due to large scale computerization  that has taken place in the 
Indian Railways over the years1; extensive changes in the Railways’ Codes  and 
Manuals and issuance of several instructions over the last two decades.  With the 
merger  of Railway budget with General  budget from 2017 -18 onwards, the audit 
of Railway Accounts  is under the process of being revamp ed.  Moreover, 
organizational restructuring of the Railways and paradigm shift in its working 
environment further necessitated the revision  of RAM.  
In the above background, Railway Audit  wing of the Hea dquarters  decided in 
February 20192 to revise the existing RAM .  
1.1 MAKING OF RAM  
Process followed  while preparing sixth edition of RAM is detailed in Annexure 
A.  
1.2   STRUCTURE OF RAM  
This edition  of the RAM  (6th edition) contains  Departmental Regulations3, 21 
chapters  on different departments /organizations  of Indian Railways  and three 
Appendices . The previous edition of the RAM focused on audit of railways’ 
earnings (including audit of Local Traffic, Through Traffic, Catering Audit ) and 
audit of railway expenditure (including expenditure on Establishment matters, 
Railway Works , Workshops , Stores), Accounts  of their earnings and expenditure 
(viz. General  Books  and Accounts, Appropriation  Accounts).  
                                                           
1A number of IT applications covering functionalities of different  departments  of Indian Rail ways like Freight 
Operations Information  Systems  (FOIS), Control Office Application (CoA), Coaching Operations Information 
Systems, Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS), Passenger Reservation System (PRS), Unrese rved 
Ticketing System (UTS), e -Procurement System, Integrated Pay Roll Accounting System, Integrated, Indian 
Railways Projects Sanctions and Management, Track Management System, Human Resources Management 
System, Hospital Management Information System etc.  covering functionalities pertaining to Commercial , 
Operating , Stores, Establishment, Personnel, Accounts , Construction medical departments etc..  
2 Hqrs. letter No. 23 -Rly/RAM -Revision/7 -1/2018 dated 07.02.2019  
3 Includes constitution of the  Railway Audit Branch, its functions, Organizational Structure of Ministry of 
Railway s, distribution of work among Railway Board Members etc.  
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
2 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 The chapters  in this edition  of the RAM  have been  organized department wise 
and old chapters of the old Manual have been completely revised.  These chapters 
provide an insight into the various aspects of functioning of Railway departments  
as well as their audit.  This manual  facilitate s an Auditor  to carry out audit of 
railway departments such as  General  Administration & Vigilance, Accounts , 
Personne l, Commercial , Operating , S&T , Civil  Engineering , Railway Works , 
Electrical Engineering, Mechanical  Engineer ing, Stores, Production  Units, 
Medical , Security , Safety  etc. 
1.3    FEATURES OF RAM  
Details about Railway Organizations/PSUs /Bodies  have been included for the 
first time in this editio n of the RAM  which facilitate  audit of activities of Centre  
for Railway Information  Systems , Rail Land  Development  Authority,  Railway 
Sports  Promotion  Board , Railway PSUs, Research Designs and Standards 
Organization.  
New features  like brief of the railway departments , organizational hierarchy , rules  
& responsibilities of the departments at various level (Ministry/Zonal/Field 
level),  criteria for identifications of Apex , Auditable  and Implementing  units at 
Ministry/field level, list  of activities done by the railway departments,  important 
risk parameters,  details about the computerized  applications being used by 
railway departments have been included which provide  deep understanding and 
knowledge about th e work ing of railway departments for facilitating an Auditor  
to conduct Audit.  
Department wise comprehensive audit check  list to be applied by the Auditor  
while undertaking audit at Apex , Audit able and Implementing  unit level s 
including general check list and activity specific check list have also been 
included.  
The check lists have been developed after considering guidelines issued by the 
office of the Comptroller  & Auditor  General  of India  on Performance  Audit , 
Compliance  Audit, Financial  Attest  Audit, Information  Technology Audit, PPP 
Audit etc., which will guide Auditor in conducting various types of audit of 
Railway departments  including Certification of Railway Accounts , Audit of 
Railway PSUs , Audit of Autonomous  Bodies  etc.  
This manual  also includes links to various orders/guidelines/circulars issued by 
the Ministry of Railways/other Govt. organizations  as well as various 
guidelines/guidance notes issued by the office of the Comptroller  & Auditor  
General  of India . 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
3 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  In October 2018, the Ministry  of Railways  decided to implement e -Office , a work  
flow based file  system  developed by National  Informatics  Center (NIC ).  This is 
a digital  workplace solution with a vi sion to achieve transparent  paperless  working, 
details of which have been included under the chapter on e -office which will 
facilitate  Audit  in e-office environment.  
This manual  also enables Auditor  to fulfill the transverse reporting 
responsibilities to DAI /ADIs seeking specialized input  as envisaged vide SMU  
wing4 of the Headquarters  office.  
1.4   NEW INITIATIVES  
1.4.1  ‘SAMPRATI ’, is an endeavor of Audit  to highlight issues of concern even during 
the execution phase, especially in project and outcome -oriented activities of the 
Railways, that can be addressed promptly, de tails of which ha ve been included 
under Appendix -I. 
1.4.2  In response to pro -active approach of the Railway Wing of the Headquarters  
office, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ) has decided5 to constitute an 
Audit  Review Committee  to look into the issues related to response, data access 
and other bottlenecks in information flow to Audit and vice -versa. Additional 
Member  (Budget ), Ad ditional Member (Works ), Director  General  of 
Audit/Principal  Director  of Audit (Railway Board  Audit) are members of the 
committee.  The commi ttee may co -opt other Additional Members of the Railway 
Board, depending upon the issues to be deliberated upon and will meet once in a 
month (Appendix -II) 
1.4.3  One IA AD One System (OIOS ) is an end -to-end enterprise -wide, i ntegrated IT 
system for all audit activities in IA&AD , covering all Field Audit  Offices and the 
Headquarters  Office  details of which ha ve been included under Appendix -III. 
2. DEPARTMENTAL REGU LATIONS  
2.1   Constitution o f the Railway Audit Branch  
2.1.1 History of Railway Audit  
The Government of India ’s resources include all revenues received by the Union  
Government, all loans raised by issue of treasury bills, in ternal and external loans 
and all moneys received by the Government in repayment of loans. Railways 
Audit  was separated from Accounts  in 1929.  The audit of Railways was entrusted  
to the Comptroller  and Auditor  General  of India (C&AG ), prior to the enactment 
                                                           
4 Refer Headquarters  letter No. 59/31 -SMU /2018 dated 9th March 2020.  
5 Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ) letter No. ERB -1/2022/23/26 dated 24th March 2022  
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
4 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act , 1971 {C&AG’s (DPC ) Act, 19 71}. 
2.1.2 Organizational set up  
Organization al set up of the Railway Audit  Branch:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.3 Authority of the Comptroller  and Auditor  General  of India  
The Compt roller  and Auditor  General  of India  (C&AG ) derives his authority and 
functions  mainly from the provisions of Articles 149 to 151 of the Constitution  
of India. Article  149 provides that the C&AG shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties in relation to the accounts of the Union  and of the States and 
of any other authority or body as may be prescribed by o r under any law made by 
the Parliament . The Parliament passed the C&AG’s DPC  Act in 1971, which 
came into force with effect from 15 December 1971 . Section 16 of the C&AG’s 
DPC Act authorises C&AG to audit all rec eipts (both revenue and capital) of the 
Government of India and of Governments of each State and of each Union 
Territory having a legislative assembly and to satisfy himself that the rules  and 
procedures are designed to secure an effective ch eck on the assessment, collection 
and proper allocation  of revenue and are being duly observed. The C &AG is the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General (Railway)  
Director G eneral of 
Audit/ Principal 
Director of Audit 
(Field Offices)  
Director/ Deputy Director of Audit  
Senior Administrative Officer/ Assistant Administrative 
Officer (Headquar ters) and Senior Audit Officer/ Assistant 
Audit officer (Field Offices)  Director General 
(Railways)/ Principal 
Director (Railways) 
– (Headquarters)  Director General of 
Audit/ Principal 
Director of Audit 
(Railway Board Audit)  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
5 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  final audit authority.  His responsibility for the audit of Railway Accounts  is 
discharged through the Deput y Comptroller and Auditor General (Railways) 
(DAI /Rlys). The DAI (Rlys) is assisted by  a Director  General  
(Railways)/ Principal  Director  (Railw ays) at Headquarters  and at Railway Board  
Audit  Office.  There are also eighteen Zonal Rail way Director s General  of 
Audit/ Principal Directors of Aud it {including Director General/ Principal 
Director ( Rail Commercial )} under the DAI (Rlys) having their offices at the 
Headquarters of the Railways to which they are attached.  
2.1.4 Administrative control and jurisdiction of Director s General  of Audi t/ 
Principal  Directors of Audit    
Director s General  of Audit /Principal  Director s of Audit work under the 
supervision and direction of the DAI  (Rlys) subject to any general or special 
orders which the DAI (Rlys) may issue, the Director s General/ Principal Directors 
of Audit may prescribe detailed instructions regarding the division of work and 
responsibility among his/ her subordinate  staff and other matters relating to the 
organisation of his/ her office.  
Directors/ Deputy  Directors in the offices of the Director  General  of A udit/ 
Principal  Director  of Audit  under whom they are working should be entrusted  
with the direct -charge of some important audit sections and inspections .  It should  
be ensured that the Directors/ Deputy D irectors hold direct charge of important 
sections apart from dealing with sensitive matters, performing essential 
administrative duties like functioning as appointing authority, under the 
discipline rules , functioning as controlling office et c.  It would also be desirable 
to rotate their charges, at least once in a year, so that they hold direct charge of 
all important sections over a period of time.  The Director s General  of Audit/ 
Principal Director s of Audit may decide how f ar they can themselves take over 
the administrative duties and the extent to which they should utilise the services 
of the Group Officer s for the purpose.   
The Director s General  of Audit / Principal  Director s of Audit are responsible for 
the efficient administration of the offices at their Headquarters  and also for the 
efficiency  of the subordinate  offices under their control.  For keeping a proper 
control over the subordinate units whether situated at Headquarters or outstations 
under their jurisdiction and in the interest of effectiveness  of the audit work done 
by the Railway Audit Organisation, the Director s General of Audit/ Principal 
Directors of Audit should visit their subordinate formations as well as important 
units of the Railway Administration like major stations , workshops and the sites 
of important works to be taken up for review from time to time.  Th e Director s 
General of Audit/ Principal Directors of Audit should have a minimum touring of 
about seven working days every month.  The important points noticed during 
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
6 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 their visits/ tours/ inspections  should be reported to Headquarters of fice in the 
form of narrative reports for information of DAI  (Rlys).  
3. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF MINISTRY OF 
RAILWAYS  
3.1  Composition of Railway Board  
Subsequent to decision of the cabinet  dated 24 Decembe r 2019 and ACC’s 
approval on reorganization of Railway on functional lines, Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board ) vide their Office Order No.64 of 2020 has revised the 
composition of Board  as under:  
I) Chairman , Railway Board  and Chief Executive Officer (CEO )-CRB,  
II) Member  (Infrastructure ), Railway Board  – M/Infra,  
III) Member  [Traction & Rolling Stock (T&RS) ], Railway Board  – M/TRS  
IV) Member  [Operations & Business Development  (O&BD )], Railway Board  
– M/O&BD, and  
V) Member  (Finance ), Railway Board  - MF 
The Organisation Structure of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ) is as 
follows:  

Railway Audit Manual  
 
7 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  3.2   List of Indian Railway Zones , their Headquarters and Divisions   
S.I. 
No. Railway Zone  Zone 
Headquarters  Railway Divisions  
1 Northern  Railway  Delhi  Delhi , Ambala, Firozpur, Lucknow 
NR, Moradabad  
2 Northeast  
Frontier Railway  Guwahati  Alipurduar, Katihar, Rangiya, 
Lumding, Tinsukia  
3 Eastern  Railway  Kolkata  Howrah, Sealdah, Asansol, Malda  
4 South  Eastern  
Railway  Kolkata  Adra, Chakradharpur, Kharagpur, 
Ranchi  
5 South  Central  
Railway  Secunderaba d Secunderabad , Hyderabad Vijayawada, 
GuntakalGuntur, Nanded  
6 Southern  Railway  Chennai  Chennai , Tiruchirappalli, Madurai, 
Palakkad, Salem, Thiruvananthapuram  
7 Central Railway  Mumbai  Mumbai , Bhusawal, Pune, Solapur, 
Nagpur  
8 Western  Railway  Mumbai  Mumbai  WR, Ratlam, Ahmedabad, 
Rajkot, Bhavnagar, Vadodara  
9 South  Western  
Railway  Hubballi  Hubballi , Bengaluru, Mysuru  
10 North  Western  
Railway  Jaipur  Jaipur , Ajmer, Bikaner, Jodhpur  
11 West Central  
Railway  Jabalpur  Jabalpur , Bhopal   Kota  
12 North  Central  
Railway  Allahabad  Allahabad , Agra, Jhansi  
13 South  East 
Central  Railway  Bilaspur  
 Bilaspur , Raipur, Nagpur SEC  
14 East Coast  
Railway  Bhubaneswar  Khurda Road, Sambalpur, Waltair  
15 East Central  
Railway  Hajipur   Dhanbad, Mughalsarai, Samastipur, 
Sonpur  
16 Konkan  Railway  Navi  Mumbai   
17 Kolkata  Metro 
Railway  Kolkata  Kolkata  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
8 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 3.3 All India  Railway Map wi th Jurisdiction6 & Headquarters  only 
 
 
 
                                                           
6 Representation purpose only - not to scale  

Railway Audit Manual  
 
9 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  3.4  Broad Distribution of Work among Board  Members  
The broad distribution  of work to be handled by the Board  Members will be as follows:  
Chairma n Railway Board  & Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO )- CRB  
 HR 
 Safety  
 Security  
 Health  
 Planning  
 Infrastructure  
 Vigilance  
 Efficiency & Research  
 Public Relation s 
 Heritage  
 Secretary’s Branches  
 Transformation Cell &  
 Corporate Co -ordination.  
Member  (Infrastructure ), Railway 
Board  – M/Infra  
 Works  
 Civil  Engineering  
 Bridges  
 Signal & Telecom  
 Land  & Amenities  
 Station Development  & 
 Railway Electrification  
Member  {Traction & Rolling Stock 
(TRS )}, Railway Board  – M/TRS  
 Production  Units  
 Mechanical  Workshops  
 Coaches  
 Locomotives  
 Train sets  
 Environment and House Keeping  
 Electrical Maintenance of Coaching 
Stock  
 Traction Distribution  
 Power Supply  
 Renewable Energy &  
 Materials Management  
Member  {Operations & Business 
Development  (O&BD )}, Railway 
Board  – M/O&BD  
 Traffic Transportation  
 Coaching  
 Tourism & Catering  
 Commercial  
 Non-Fare Revenue  
 Market ing & Business Development  & 
 IT 
Member  (Finance ), Railway Board  
– MF 
 Accounts  
 Finance  
 Budget  
 Revenue  
 Stat & Econ &  
 Economic U nit 
 
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
10 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 4.  GENERAL DUT IES OF THE RAILWAY AUDIT BRANCH  
4.1.  Functions of CAG   
The functions  of the CAG  have been incorporated in CAG's (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act , 1971.  The extent o f his responsibility for audit of 
various types of railway transactions is as follows:  
I) He is responsible for audit of all expenditure both in and outside India  on 
Railways from the revenues of India; but no responsibility is imposed on 
him fo r keeping the accounts.  
II) He is required to audit all transactions of railways relating to debt, 
deposits, sinking  funds, advance, suspense  account and remittance  
transactions.  
III) He is required to audit all t rading, manufacturing, profit and loss account 
and balance sheet of railways.  
IV) He is required to audit receipts and accounts of stores and stock relating 
to railways.  
V) He is responsible for audit and certification  of the accounts of 
Government companies  and corporations relating to Railway established 
by or under any law by Parliament / Legislative  Assembly  in accordance 
with the provisions of the respective enactme nts. 
VI) He is required to audit and certify the accounts of any body or authority 
relating to Railway whose audit has not been entrusted  to him, if so 
required by the President  upon such terms and conditions as may be 
agree d upon between the Comptroller  and Auditor  General  of India  and 
the Government of India.  
VII) The contracts of certain lines not financed by Government provide for 
some measure of Government Audi t in certain matters and this duty also 
devolves upon him.  
Various functions  of Railway Audit  involves:  
 Auditing sanctions  involving finance.  
 Auditing Rules and General  orders involving finance.  
 Auditing Tender documents involving finance.  
 Auditing Accounts  maintained by Account Department.  
 Inspection  of Record and Vouchers.  
 Auditing estimates prepare for projects.  
 Checking internal audit mech anism and to ensure the accounting system 
adopted is suitable and adequate for its purpose.  
 
Railway Audit Manual  
 
11 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  Audit  Methodology involves:  
 Test check of vouchers  
 Inspection  of offices  
 Check of financial sanctions  
 Check of a ll orders/sanctions  issued by GM & other officers  
 Check of all receipts and payments & accounts  
 Check of tenders & Contracts  
 Check of procedures and systems  
4.2  Functions of Railway Audit  Wing – 
 The Railway Audit  Wing under the  DAI (Rlys) conducts audit on behalf of and 
under the direction of the CAG  and is responsible for:  
I) Scrutinising  the adequacy and suitability of all instructions relating to the 
compilation of railway accounts and internal check procedure, whether 
these instructions be in the form of codes or otherwise, to satisfy himself 
that such instructions are consistent with the relevant statutory rules  and 
the requirements of audit and accou nts [Cf. Para 2.2.14 of CAG 's M.S.O . 
(Audit )] and  
II) Audit  of 
a) sanctions  having financial effect accorded by the Government of India  
other than those pertaining solely to an individual railway or railway 
accounts office;  
b) sanctions  regarding financial rules  and general orders issued by the 
President  which are not of a general nature but are applicable 
exclusively to the Railway Department;  
c) tenders invited by the Railway Board  for the purchase of cast iron and 
steel sleepers, rolling stock and other materials;  
d) accounts maintained in the office of the Railway Board  (Accounts  
Branch);  
e) all sanctions  and orders issued by the President  or Government of 
India  relating to through traffic ; 
f) rules  and modifications issued by the IRCA  and al l correction slips to 
tariffs and publications issued by the Association.  
Note -1 Sanctions referred to above are not only sanctions  to expenditure but also 
sanctions relating to local  traffic  and applicable t o more than one railway.  
Note -2-The sanctions  referred to in item (a), (b), (e) and (f ) above would be scrutinised 
in the Headquarters  office with reference to Railway Board 's files, codal 
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
12 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 provis ions, etc. and any specific guidance of instructions considered necessary 
issued to the field offices.  Formal acceptance in audit of the sanctions issued by 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ) need not, however, be communicated 
to the P rincipal  Directors of Audit  of the Zonal Railways.  The Principal Directors 
of Audit should not refrain from conducting scrutiny of such sanctions just merely 
because the primary responsibility for audit of these sanctions r ests with the 
Headquarters office.  The Principal Directors of Audit should communicate 
objectionable features  noticed, if any, in course of their scrutiny of the sanctions, 
in addition to their remarks on the points as may be referred to by the 
Headquarters office, so that the same can be taken up with the Minis try of 
Railways (Railway Board).  
g) budget orders issued at the commencement of the financial year;  
h) subsequent orders of re -appropriation  against the vote of the 
Parliament ; 
i) orders of appropriation  and re -appropriation issued by the President , 
and 
j) orders of regularisation of excess issued after a consideration of the 
Appropriation  Acco unts and the Audit  Report;  
NOTE - In respect of items (g), (h) and (i ) the check will be applied to verify that 
the aggregate allotments to individual railways or departments  under each 
grant and appropriat ion do not exceed the amount voted by the Parliament  
or appropriation sanctioned by the President . 
k) monthly and annual accounts of railways and of the railway section of 
the Finance  Accounts  of the Union  Government including the Annual 
Review of Balances as compiled by the Railway Board , (after check, 
the material is forwarded to the Director  General  of Audit , Central  
Revenues);  
l) the Appropriation  Accounts  prepared by the Railway Board , 
certifying to their accuracy and submitting the Audit  Report thereon 
to the CAG  vide para 3.14.2 M.S.O . (Audit).  
4.3  Duties of Director s General  of Audit /Principal  Director s of Audit  
The Director s General  of Audit /Principal  Directors of Audit attached to the 
individual railways are responsible for the scrutiny and audit of:  
I) financial sanctions  pertaining to their railway s and offices under their 
audit control, accorded by the Government of India , Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board ) or the General  Manager ; 
II) the allocation  of estimates sa nctioned by the same authorities;  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
13 
For internal use of IA&AD  
  III) general orders issued by the General  Manager  under the powers delegated 
to him;  
IV) sanctions  pertaining to local  traffic ; 
V) sanctions  issued by the Railway Administration relating to inter change 
traffic  between railways;  
VI) the detailed accounts of the railways to see that these have been correctly 
prepared and are in proper form, no alteration in the form of the accou nts 
or in classification  is made without the approval of the competent 
authority, the system of internal check is efficient and that all 
appropriations or re -appropriations sanctioned by the General  Manager  or 
subordinate  authorities are in order;  
VII) allocation  of expenditure divisible between two or more sections of a 
railway to see that the division between the main and worked lines and 
between commercial  and strategic  sections of a railway has been made 
correctly;  
VIII) expenditure from the Secret Fund  placed at the disposal of Railway 
Administration, only to the extent of seeing that the prescribed certificate 
is received from the General  Manager  in respect of each financial year;  
IX) the annual Review of Balances and the Appropriation  Accounts  of the 
Railway and certifying to their correctness;  
X) and also for conducting periodical  inspections  of the stations  and accounts 
of the executive  offices.  
The Director  General  of Audit / Principal  Director  of Audit, Northern  Railway is 
also responsible for the scrutiny and audit of (1) all sanctions  and orders issued 
by the President  or Gov ernment of India  relating to foreign traffic  transactions 
with Pakistan  (2) sanctions of Railway Administrations relating to interchanged  
traffic between two or more railways, besides arra nging a monthly check of such 
sanctions with reference to the prescribed minima and maxima of rates relating 
to all Government railways, and (3) the accounts of receipts and expenditure 
relating to establishment of the Railway Board  and its attached offices.  
The Audit  of sanctions  relating to foreign traffic  transactions with Bangladesh 
will be done by Director  General  of Audit/ Principal  Director  of Audit, Eastern  
Railway.  
5. TYPES OF AUDIT  
The audit done by C&AG  is broadly classified into  
5.1  Financial  Audit  
Financial  Attest  Audit  (FAA ) is concerned with expression of audit opinion on a 
set of financial statements. FAA is required to be carried out to reduce the 
Chapter 1 – Introduction to Railway Audit Manual  
 
14 
For internal use of IA&AD  
 possibility of the material misstatement in a financial statement and thereb y, 
provide credibility to such a statement. FAA Guidelines.pdf (cag.gov.in)  
5.2  Compliance  Audit   
Complia nce audit is an assessment as to whether the provisions of the applicable 
laws, rules  and regulations  made there under and various orders and instructions 
issued by the competent authority a re being complied with. This audit by its very 
nature promotes accountability, good governance and transparency as it is 
concerned with reporting deviations, identifying weaknesses and assessing 
propriety .Compliance -Guidelines -approved -final-preface -05de4efef9159d0 -
85033036.pdf (cag.gov.in)  
5.3 Performance  Audit  
Performance  auditing  carried out by the Department is an independent , objective  
and reliable examination of whether government undertakings, programs , 
systems, activities or organisa tions are performing in accordance with the 
principles of economy , efficiency  & effectiveness  and whether there is room for 
improvement. Performance Auditing Guidelines 2014 (cag.gov.in)  
6. COMMUNICATION FROM AUDIT  
6.1  Specific Reports  - related to more important and serious irregularities noticed.  
6.2   Audit Notes  - on irregularities rela ted to Account Branch in Part -I. 
6.3   Inspection  Reports  - on irregularities related to E xecutives  and Stations in 
Part-I and II.  
7. DISPOSAL OF AUDIT/ INSPECTION REPORTS  
Audit  reports should be promptly attended to and reply sent. Audit Note Part -II, 
Inspection  Report Part -II are closed at Account level. Audit Note Part -I and 
Inspection report Part -I are to be replied to Audit th rough the Accounts  office.  
7.1  Special letters and Notes or Objections or Factual Statement  
These relate to important cases noticed during regular audit and inspections  
meriting inclusion in the Audit  Report to the CAG . Prompt action at higher levels 
is called for in these cases.. Draft Para  is a serious report of Audit and reply to be 
sent within four weeks (as per Audit Regulations , 2020)/ six weeks (as per 
Railway Board ) by the Executive and Accounts  (as decided during the meeting 
of Stake Holders on 23 February 2020)  covering the following aspects:  
 History of the case with copies of relevant records.  
 Sentence -wise remarks.  
 Chronological summary of the case where there is an unusual delay.  
Railway Audit Manual  
 
15 
For internal use of IA&AD  
   Remedial action taken and  
 Disciplinary action taken or proposed on the individual lapses referred.  
 
