 
399 
 
Where the lease period exceeds one year the lease amount may be permitted to be paid in not more than two 
installments for every year of lease, the last  installment is being payable one year before the period of expiry of the 
lease period or in the beginning of the lease period whichever is earlier. 
 
That the Bank Guarantee should be kept alive till the realisation of entire dues from the lessees. 
 
That the lease cum deed is executed incorporating all conditions. 
 
(Director of Town Panchayats Circular Roc. 14956/06 dt:27-09-2006) 
65.  BUDGET:  The scrutiny of the expenditure for the year under several heads should be compared with the provision 
in the budget. Sanction of the Town Panchayat and of the District Collector for reappropriation of amounts 
exceeding Rs.100 in each case and that of the panchayat in ‗other cases should be called for and verified. If such a 
transfer of allotment is required after the close of the year to which the transaction relates the sanction of the 
District Collector should be called for irrespective of the amount involved. Expenditure in excess of the budget 
provision without reappropriation of funds under competent sanction should also be listed out for inclusion in the 
report in case where the excess exceeds Rs.25/-. 
Note: Each case of excess expenditure which does not exceed 5 per cent of the provision in the Budget estimate, should 
be got ratified by the District Collector concerned after obtaining the sanction of the concerned Town Panchayat and 
each case of excess expenditure which exceeds 5 per cent of the provision in the Budget Estimate should be got 
approved by the District Collector.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1487,   Rural Development and Local Administration,   dated 21st September 1979)  
Audit Report 
 
On the conclusion of audit  the annual audit report with important irregularities should be prepared and forwarded to 
the Executive Authority along with a copy of the audited annual account of receipts a