97. Expenditure on works: The expenditure on work is incurred by Panchayat union Council for execution of Village Works Programme, maintenance of roads with the aid of Local Roads Grant and other Capital works under Village Works Programme. Works are undertaken for Water Supply Schemes also. The audit of work vouchers should be done on the general lines indicated in the Municipal Chapter. The following registers and records should be examined in audit. Estimate. Nominal Muster Rolls in respect of works done departmentally. Contract Certificates. Tender files and contract agreements. Register of estimates and allotments. Measurement books. Completion reports. Road Metal Account. Personal ledger. Tender Register. Register of contractors. Register of Roads. Reimbursement Register. Checkslip for the closure of work. as prescribed in Examiner‘s D.O. Letter No.Rc.Hl/16470/78-2, dated 31 March 1978 as explained in the Municipal Chapter.. The checks to be exercised in respect of Registers and Records stated above are similar to those given in the Municipal Chapter. The important checks to be exercised are detailed below: It should be seen that the estimates have been got approved by the competent administrative and Technical Authorities. The Administrative authority in respect of Estimates for Panchayat Union Works is the P.U.C. concerned. ii. Check of Nominal Muster Rolls in respect of Works: In regard to departmental works executed by the Village Panchayat Departmentally it should be seen that the instructions issued for works in G.0.Ms.No.2222, RD&LA, dated 7th October 1965 are followed specifically while executing the works. The value of work done as measured and check measured by the Union Engineer after deducting 10% towards Panchayat contribution is paid by the Union and the amount later reimbursed by union from State funds. 466 It should be seen in audit that the value of work done as recorded in the M.Book corresponds to the actual payment made by N.M.R. If the N.M.R. payment is more than the value of work done, then the payment to the panchayat should be restricted to the actual value of work done and ―if the N.M.R. payment is less than the value of work done, it would mean that the value of work has been inflated to draw more grant. In such cases the actual payment by N.M.R. should have been paid to panchayat. These aspect should be critically examined and payments to panchayats and consequential overdrawal of Government grant should be commented in audit. The Pt. Union Commissioner should test check the N.M.R. frequently and ensure that the permanent or temporary addresses of coolies or Labourers employed in the works should be recorded in the N.M.Rs and standard N.M.R. forms should be made available with the necessary additional column therein for recording the addresses of coolies or labourers employed. The N.M.Rs blank sheets must be under the safe custody of the Cashier. Machine numbers should be assigned to each N.M.R. sheet and office seal affixed in each N.M.R. These sheets must ‗be issued to outdoor staff by the Cashier after obtaining the signature of the outdoor staff, so that use of bogus N.M.R. sheets can be avoided. If N.M.Rs are prepared for the execution‘ of works, the Commissioners, before making payment, should visit the spot and ensure as to whether the required quantum of work has actually been done for which the N.M.R.s have been prepared and should record in the M.Book that he has verified the work on the spot. Only then, the payment for the N.M.Rs should be made. Similarly the correctness of the N.M.Rs prepared for the collection of metal, for spreading of road metal, earthwork, etc., should also be verified physically by the panchayat union Commissioners and the fact recorded in the M.Book before payment is made. (Govt. Memo.No.28850/F 1II179-4, RD&LA, (dated 28th September 1979) iii. Purchase of pipes, cement, etc. and maintenance of stock account: A committee consisting of the following persons may be formed for the maintenance of power pumps and Hand pumbs. District Collector - Chairman Project Officer - DRDA - Vice Chairman P.A. to District Collector Pt. Development - Member Secretary Divisional Engineer Highways - Rural Works - Member Secretary Executive Engineer-TWAD Board - Member Executive Engineer - TNEB - Member Two member nominated by District Development council from the Panchayat Presidents - Member Asst. Executive Engineer for the maintenance of power pump in collectorate - Special Nominee. Conditions: 1. The committee will finalise the annual requirements (indents) of the Panchayat and Panchayat Unions for the financial year. It should be finalised two months before the end of the financial year. 2. As per G.O. Ms. No.75/- Finance dt:19-02-1997 tenders and quotations shall be called for. 3. The rate offered by the company may be compared with the local market rates by the committee. The samples may also be received so as to ensure the quality. The rates of the pipes may also be compared with the rates of the pipes and quality approved by the TWAD Board. 4. The rates and quality approved may be communicated to Panchayat and Panchayat Union by the Purchase Committee. 467 5. The panchayat and Panchayat Union may purchase the materials at the approved rates and also from the approved companies. 6. In respect of repairs of the power pumps and Hand pumps it may be get repaired at the approved rates of District Purchase Committee. 7. Capital purchase need not be done. (G.O. Ms. No.159 / Rural Development Department dt:1-05-1997) (G.O. (Rt) No.84 / Rural Development (D3) Department dt:05-05-1998) . It should be seen that the issues made are verified with reference to entries recorded in Measurement Book and the balance struck and certified by the Union Engineer. It should be also be ascertained that the purchases have been made after assessing the requirements and that no abnormal purchases have been made. (HO.Circular RC.No.61722174·D/dated 27th June 1975) (Memo.No.147883/PC/68-5/RD&LA dated 7th March 1969 and Memo NO.92803 PV 1I/71-5 RD&LA dated 24th November 1971) iv. Cement: Cement is purchased usually by the Pt. Union Council and supplied to contractors after recovering the cost. It should be seen: that the quantity of cement purchased has been entered in the stock account, maintained for it. that the sale-price of cement have been worked out as shown below:- Cost of cement bag as per company‘s bill Transport charges actually incurred to bring the cement bags from the factory to the Block . Loading and unloading charges actually incurred .............. Incidental charges marginal profit at 0.15 paise per bag .............. Total cost .............. (Govt.Lr.79518/P3/79/RD&LA, dated 25th July 1979) (Examiner‘s Circular Rc.No.34042479/dated 29th August 1979) For recovering the cost of materials supplied Departmentally to the contractors the following procedure has to be adopted in case of percentage tender. Value of workdone ..................... Less: Value of materials supplied ..................... Less: Add-Tender percentage ..................... Net Due NOTE: THE TENDER PERCENTAGE SHALL NOT BE APPLIED TO MATERIALS SUPPLIED. (G.O.Ms.No.1348, LA, dated 12th October 1955) It should be seen:- that the cement has been issued only after collecting the cost and no credit sales was made. that the quantity issued for the work is correct. For this purpose, the cement requirement should be arithmetically worked out based on the data. The following additional clause, viz. clause 9 should be included in the agreement for the works relating to panchayat and panchayat union. . 468 For the quantity of cement, steel, Bitumen etc. wasted or used in excess of the prescribed quantity (2~% in the case of bitumen and steel and 5% in the case of cement) not returned in good condition by the Contractor the recovery of the cost will be double the issue rate. (G.O.Ms.No.985, RD&LA, dated 14th May 1979) In cases of shortages noticed during physical verification and shortages due to clothing, recovery is to be effected at single cost. As per G.O.Ms.No.848, RD&LA, dated 9th June 1982 Cement gunny bags in respect of departmental supply should be returned by the Contractors and therefore the observance of the instructions should be verified in audit. Regarding the rate of recovery for materials, the contract will stipulate the rates where departmental supply was contemplated at the time of invitation of tenders. Otherwise market rate or issue rate whichever is higher will be adopted. (Para ]50, 540 of Highways Manual and Memo.No.67-7/34976/RD&LA, dated 18th March 1968) Bitumen should be supplied departmentally to the Contractors for works. Utilisation of Bitumen from other source should be objected to in audit. Vide Govt.Lr.60465/A1I86-3/Industries, dated 9th February 1987. If the quantity of work done is restricted to estimate quantity at the time of payment, the recovery towards the cost of cement for the excess quantity issued over and above the theoretical requirement should be made at single cost only. (H.O.L.F..Dis.116677/84/DI/dated 8th March 1985) v. Important Government Orders relating Panchayat Union Works: Income Tax at 2% of works costing more than Rs.20,000/- should be recovered from the Contractor and remitted to Income Tax Department. Govt. Lr.No.47650/M4/86-lO,/MA&WS/dated 23rd Jime·1987 & Head Office RC.No.46S01/Dl/85/dated 23rd December 1987. (In addition surcharge on I.T. at10% should also be recorded). Panchayat Union and Panchayat are the authorities competent to decide the manner of disposal of the blasted well spoils. (Memo.No.216257/P4/60·7/RD&LA, dated 1st September 1961) Tenders may be dispensed with or without obtaining the prior approval of the Divisional Engineer (H&RW) in respect of relief works undertaken by Panchayat Union Councils in the drought affected areas when the amount of work does not exceed Rs. 3,000/- . (G.O.Ms.No.63 RD&LA, dated 17th January 1975) The provision of levy of fines for delayed execution of works by contractors should be incorporated in the agreement entered into by Panchayat Union Council and fines levied as per the terms of agreement. (Govt. Memo.No.99323/PV-II73-17, dated 1st July 1975) vi. The following instructions issued by Chief Engineer, regarding measurement and check-measurement of materials collected should be borne in mind in the audit of work vouchers. Road materials shall be measured only after the whole collection on the well defined stretch of a road is completed and immediately after measurements the stacks shall be marked by white wash or otherwise as directed by the Engineer. Further collection of the same material shall be allowed to be made only after the materials already collected is spread, either overall measurements of the material in the stretch of the road should be taken and the quantity paid for already is deducted while doing subsequent payment, or a certificate that the material previously collected was intact while measuring the subsequent collection should be furnished by the measuring and check measuring authorities after giving references of pages and Measurement Book in which measurements for the old collection have been recorded. (C.E.R.&R.W.) Memo.No.98231D2175-l1 dated 10th April 1975) vii. The C.E. has issued the following instruction to the technical authorities for strict adherence in future. The officers who prepared the estimate and those who executed the work are responsible for the excess. The officer at the time of the preparation of estimate should arrive at the correct earth work quantity according to site 469 conditions so as to avoid any excess later on at the time of execution. If any excess is anticipated the same should be reported to higher technical authorities by the Field Officers very promptly with proper reasons before taking up the execution of additional work. The actual execution should be taken up only after obtaining the approval of higher authority for the excess and such excess on huge variation should be subjected to detailed investigations. For the excess of earth work already executed, the payment should have to be withheld or recovered from the contractors till the excess is justified after investigation. [C.E.‘s (H&RW) memo.531581L3/75-2/dated 30th July 1975] (H.O.Roc.No.641 07/74/Dl/dated 5th September 1975) spreading gravel is done for road in different layers including watering and consolidation with hand roller rolling in general to a thickness varying from.20 mm to 100 mm. There are rates for spreading gravel in the schedule of rates for different thickness. In certain cases in Pt. Unions where hand roller rolling is not possible in interior places and where the existing surface is very much tracked or uneven filling the surface of roads with gravel is allowed. In the cases of roads with deep cart tracks ruts and gullies gravelling is being done by filling and consolidation will be done by heavy ramming. For this item of gravelling no hand roller can be used and only filling rate is allowed which will be lesser than that‘of spreading. When filling of gravel (ie) dry spread is done the payment will be in terms of one· cubic metre or 10 cubic metre and when spreading is done with watering and hand roller rolling it will be in terms of one square metre or 10 sq.m. [Lr.Roc.No.28135174/Dtldated 19.th January 1976 of S.B. (H.&R.W.] (Madras circle communicated in H.O.Roc.No.54031176/Dl/18th March 1975) viii. Lumpsum provisions (ie) provisions under contingencies should be limited to 2.5% of the estimate amount Lumpsum provision should not be made in the estimate without noting the specific item of work. The provision should not be utilised for any other items of works covered in the main estimate. Entrustment of additional items should be got approved by the authority according technical sanction to the original estimate. For employment of technical persons to supervise the work, the allotment under Lumpsum provision Should be appropriated. The total expenditure should not exceed 21/2% of the estimated cost in the case of departmental works. In some cases estimate may be prepared· for road works and culvert, but the entire provisions utilised for road alone and culvert work is abandoned such cases should be suitably commented in audit. The C.E. (H.R.W.) has issued instructions that the fund allotted for culvert should be utilised only for particular items and there should be no deviation from the original provision. If the item is not executed the reason should be explained and got approved by competent authority. A main estimate for the entire length may be prepared for the continuous reach providing sub-estimate for‘ speedy execution and split up into convenient operational reaches for the purpose of inviting tenders with the approval of competent authority in order to evoke competition and for completing the work quickly. In no case separate estimate· for reaches which form part of continuous stretch should be allowed to be sanctioned, thus avoiding higher sanction. In the case of work relating to Minor irrigation and Ex-zamin sources, the leads allowed during execution of work is based on the actual distance of the pit located from the top of the bund. As per M.D.S.S. the pit should never located within twice the height of the bund. In such cases the lead may very from one extra lead to two extra leads according to the size of the pits depending on the quantity of earth work required at the particular reach. The lifts allowed depend on the difference between the formation of bund and bed level of the tank. The lift might vary according to the location of Pits, viz. the lift will be more in the deep bed and will be less at tanks-Notionally leads and lifts are allowed according to the site condition and the necessity for providing excess lead and lift can only be observed and realised during the execution of work subject to availability of earth at particular location, it should be seen in audit whether the work is properly measured and check measured by the competent authority. This is a serious one if it is proved that extra leads and lifts were allowed for favouring the contractor. The bonafide of the measurement recorded and check measured by the authority competent if doubtful may be got checked by the next superior technical authority. Earth work excavation is being done as per type design for well work approved by Engineers. In light and loose soils the width of excavation will be greater than that in hard soils. Payment for excavation should be made as per M.D.S.S. Refilling charges of excavated earth cannot be allowed as per M.D.S.S. 470 In the case of W.B.M. surface no blindage work by departmental gangs is admissible within 6 months from the date of final check-measurement. Further maintenance work with be done after six months of observation period and if blindage is necessary in the observation period, . that will be done by the contractor at his expense. After that, depending upon the condition of the road, gravel blinding will be done by department. Without proper certificate from the officer who ‗check measured the work, the security deposits should not be refunded to the contractor. The security deposit is retained as a source of security so that the contractor should maintain the surface in good condition during the observation period. [Lr.No.11885/L1I75-15/dated 22nd July 1976 of C.E.‘s (HRW) Madras.] Communicated in Examiner‘s D.Dis.No.203148/74/dated 16th July 1977. In case of borrow pits, measurements the certificate of removal of deadman should be verified in audit. The borrow pits should not be deeper than 3 feet and longer than 150 feet. Ten percent of outlay of the earthwork done should be deducted from the total value of work done in cases where the deadman is not removed within a period of 15 days (from the date of check measurement as per Article 304, of Highways Manual Vol. I). When carted earth is brought to the site for formation the payment should be made for the quantity of earth spread after deducting 16% of quantity of earth towards voids. ix. No deduction for voids: With reference to the above, it is informed that if payment is being made for only finished items of works and not for the collection of aggregates for payment courses separately, there is no need for the deduction of voids in the stock measurement of aggregates. However the Executive Engineer is informed that the collection of aggregates has to be made to cover the extra quantity required for compaction. (Director Letter No. S.12-191-1 AE(IT) Highways Research Station dt:2-5-2005) x. The loss due to incorrect preparation of data has to be regulated as follows: In the case of work entrusted to the contractor on nomination at % basis on estimate rate without calling for tenders, the loss can be recovered from the persons responsible for preparing data with incorrect particulars. In the case of work entrusted to the contractor after calling for tenders, the estimate has to be revised with correct data which will affect the rate of particular item or item which would have been noted in a comparative statement of tenders for deciding tenders. Hence to regularise the position a fresh comparative statement has to be prepared to arrive at the revised percent of tenders and based on the revised percentage so arrived at the ratification of the competent authority who can accept that tender consequent on increase in percentage premium has to be obtained. [Lr. No. Wks. S II (2) 6804170/dated 17th August 1970 of C.E. (GI) irrigation and P.A. Project.] Errors in data will not affect payments to contractors who are paid at the rate quoted by them inflated data and consequential ,excess payments need not be objected in audit. (C.E. (H&RW) Lr.No.38552/D5170-I/dated 30th June 1971. The expenditure on painting the survey stones in pt. Union roads in green colour and in pt. roads in orange colour may be met from Panchayat Union general funds or pt. Funds respectively. (G.O.Rt.No.2202 RD&LA, dated 6th October 1976, D.R.D.‘s Lr. No. D.Dis 1 8534l/H2/26th October 1976. xi. Maintenance of Own Buildings: Women teachers Quarters; The women Teachers quarters will continue to be maintained by the Panchayat Union and the expenditure to be met from the General Fund of Pt.Union as laid down in G.O.Ms.No.56 RD&LA dated 1lth January 1968. Rent collected for occupation of pt.Union Elementary school Women teacher‘s Quarters be credited to the General Fund accounts of the Pt.Unions. (Govt.Memo.No.1393/4/77-1/ Education, dated 26th February 1977. Noon Meal Centres: The expenditure towards maintenance of buildings for Noon-Meals centres can be met from the funds of the General fund, provided no separate grant for the purpose is received from Govt. 471 xii. Registers relating to works : (1) Register of Estimates and Allotment: This register should be checked to see: that separate set of pages have been set apart for works falling under different categories. that the register is a complete record of estimates and allotments sanctioned. that the original allotments and transfer of lands have been duly noted .. The sanction quoted against the estimates and allotment should be test checked here and there with the copies of the resolution of the P.U.C. that the amount of sanctioned estimates and allotments as shown in this register agree with those entered on vouchers. that in the case of maintenance works credit is taken for materials at site. For this purpose the monthly statement of receipts, issues and balance materials or the annual verification statements should be examined. that the incomplete works have been carried forwards to the next year‘s register. 2. Tender Register: This Register should be examined to see that the register is posted work wise with reference to the original Tenders and shows the name of the tenderers, tender percentage, amount of deposit, recommendations of Engineer and Commissioner and the orders of the authority competent to accept the tender. It should also be seen that a certificate as to the correctness of the entries and of the tabulations has been submitted by the U.E. and that it bears evidence of scrutiny at the hands of commissioner. 3. Register of Roads: It should be seen that the names of Panchayat Union Roads have been entered in the register with particulars of length, classification of such as metalled or non-metalled and that renewals or special repairs carried out during each year together with the particulars of kilometre have been noted there and then. All earthern roads formed by H & RW under Drought Relief programme shall be handed over to Panchayat Unions for further maintenance (G.0.46 RD & LA dated 6th January 1984). It should be verified in audit that whether the length of roads handed over to the Government from time to time has been deleted and the net length of road arrived at in the ledger. Unclassified Roads which are subsequently classified as Panchayat Union Roads are entered in the Ledger with full details. At the end of the financial year an abstract is struck and closed over the signature of the officer. 4. Register of Contractors: A register of contractors shall be maintained in the village panchayat, panchayat union and district panchayat offices respectively in Form I a and such register shall be treated as confidential. A copy of the register shall be submitted annually to the block Engineer / Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) in case of village panchayat, and to the Executive Engineer (Rural Development) in case of panchayat union and district panchayat, by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be. The register of contractors shall be kept up-to-date, and when submitted to the authority under rule 12, such authority shall scrutinise the register at least once in a year and sign it in token of his scrutiny. Any changes in the register considered necessary by such authority shall be referred by him in writing to the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, for orders. The executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be‘, shall pass orders on the changes, if any, proposed by the said authority and shall record his reasons for the changes, if any, ordered by him. A copy of the corrections made in the register shall be submitted to the Executive Engineer (Rural Development) concerned and shall be filed with the register in his office. In the remarks column of the register, the qualifications of the contractor, the quality and magnitude of work previously executed by him and all other relevant particulars shall be entered. 472 This register should be examined to see that the contractors whose name appear in the register have paid the fees prescribed for registration and that changes in the register have been effected only under the orders of the Commissioner and that the names of the contractors whose names have been removed from the list do not find place in the register. 4. (a) Personal ledger of contractors: The entries in this ledger should be checked in detail with reference to the contract certificate concerned. The checks to be exercised are: that a separate folio has been opened for each contractor, that an index is attached to the ledger for facility of reference, that when a contractor is engaged upon more than one work the transactions relating to each of them have been recorded separately, that the entries of debits and credits agree with those in corresponding contract certificate, that the balance due on account of each work agree with that shown in the contract certificate, (vi) that the ledger bears evidence of check by the Engineer, that the balances are correctly brought forward, and that the statement of outstanding balance is correctly prepared. For the purpose of this check, the whole of the items not effected by the months transactions as shown in the ledger, should the traced into the statement referred to. If large outstandings are left unadjusted without sufficient - causes, the fact should be stated in the Audit Reports or Audit Notes. that in the cases where contractors unduly delay preferring their claims, the accounts concerned are closed and the amounts due are transferred to deposits. 5. Road Metal Statement: It should be seen that the metal statement has been received every month in all cases, that the opening balance agrees with the closing balances of the previous return, and that the receipts, issues and balances of materials have been correctly shown and references given to the payment vouchers. For this purpose all the purchases and issues according to the vouchers for works should be traced into the statement. that the closing balance of materials at Road sides at the close of the year have been verified by Commissioner and found to agree with those in the Road Metal statement and the differences between the account balance and the actual quantity at site have been satisfactorily explained or that steps have been taken to write off or to recover the value. that the balance as finally settled have been carried over to the statement of the next year and (vi) that the Road metal statement is maintained. (Govt.Lr.No.28903/83/79-91RD&LA dt:20-0S-80 and D.R.D‘s Circular NO.RC.81734/80/ AcctsIVIIdt:07-06-80.) 6. Measurement Book: During Local audit measurement books in respect of all work bills should be called for and checked. In respect of detailed measurements it is enough if 10% of the entries are checked. The pagewar totals should however be checked cent percent and ensured that the totals have been correctly carried over to the abstract struck. In checking the measurement books the following points should be kept in view. that a stock register of M.Book is maintained :n the prescribed form. that the measurements relating to each work are recorded either in seperate book or on separate pages set apart for the purposes. 473 that the requisite details as regards locality, lead, size and description of materials etc. have been given in the M.Books. that no ereasures are noticeable and that all alternations in the M. Books have been duly authenticated either by the measuring officer or by the check measuring officer in the case of corrections made by the latter. that the totals for each description of work have been correctly entered in the abstract prepared at the end of the measurements recorded in the M. Books. that bills are copies of the abstract prepared in M.Books. that no duplicate bills have been obtained and filled in the office. that in the case of final payments, check measurements are ordinarily made as early as possible after the completion of the works and in any case not delayed for more than two weeks, and that the check measuring officer has attested any corrections made by him in the bills and has filled in and signed the check measurement certificate properly. that in the case of disallowance or increase made by the check measuring officer or fines levied, the necessary deductions or additions have been made in the final bills that the collection and spreading of materials have not been measured together and that in case of measurement and check measurement being done on the same date a certificate has been recorded to the effect that the measurement and check-measurement has been done independently. No materials should be spread before check-measurement. Regarding measurement and· check-measurement of materials collected the instructions issued in circular memo.No.198231D2nS·1 dt: 10-04-75 of C.E. (H & RW) should be followed (vide sub-para D (viii) above) that the calculations and totals in the measurement are correct. that the measurements of departmental works appear in those books. that the rates at which departmental work is valued are not more than the rates in the current schedule of rates. that the entries of measurements for which bills have been prepared and submitted are duly scored out in red ink and reference is given to bills so prepared. that all the measurements of work done otherwise than departmentally are check measured by Union Engineer or a higher technical Authority. that all measurements are recorded clearly and indeligibly the measuring officer himself. that in the cases where the date of check measurement certificate is prior to that of the measurement by the sub- ordinate, the check-measuring officer‘s measurements are recorded in separate book kept by him for the purpose which should also be incorporated in the regular measurement book. that the pencil entries if any in column ‗L‘ ‗B‘ and ‗D‘ are not inked over and that those in the contents column are always made in ink in the first instance itself and not inked over after words. that the amounts provided in the estimates for ―Sundries‖ or ‗contingencies‘ have not been paid to the contractor as a matter of course, but the details of the work said to have been executed are available. that all M.Books are eventually returned to the office for file and the fact recorded in the stock register of M.Books. that generally the rules and instructions issued regarding measurement and check measurement have been observed. that the signature of the contractor has been obtained in the M.Book in token of having accepted the measurement and 474 that all M.Books have been numbered serially 7. Completion reports: The checks to be exercised are that the report is submitted along with the final bill. that the entries in the report are in accordance with those in the Register of works. that the expenditure incurred towards supervision charges, difference cost of cement steel, bitumen, etc, are exhibited in the completion report and the amount there of included in the total value of work done. If the total value of work done including differential cost of materials, etc. exceeds 5% of the estimated cost, a revised estimate should be prepared and got approved by the competent authority, that all deviations are duly sanctioned. that the name of the Engineer or subordinate who supervised the work has been duly filled in that the explanations for differences and proposals for disposal of materials at site are duly given. xiii. Imprest Accounts: It should be seen that the imprest are recouped on proper vouchers duly passed by P.U. Commissioner and amount disallowed if any have been duly recovered. xiv. Reimbursement Register: It should be seen that the work bills for which Government grant due has been entered in the Register. that the grant due and contributions due has been worked out correctly, and that the sanction order and adjustment of the grant sanctioned has been noted in the Register. xv. Asset Register: Register of Assets acquired wholly or partly out of Government Grant. It should be seen that all assets acquired out of Government grants have been entered in this Register. (Government memo. 93229/ Accts/spl. dt:16-04-1973) xvi. Contractor’s Agreement: It should be seen whether the agreement has been executed in P.U. Form NO.60 in respect of original works and in P.U. Form No 60A - in respect of maintenance works. The following clauses viz. 9A has been inserted in P.U. Form NO.60A the works shall be under observation period of 2 years from the date of final check-measurement. The Contractor shall maintain the works in a satisfactory condition during the period of observation at his own cost. The contractors deposit may be refunded on expiry of the observation period of 2 years, or 3 months as the case may be on remedying any defects that appeared during the observations period whichever happens later. (G.O.Ms.CNo.539, RD & LA, dt: 26-03-80) (G.O.Ms.No.455, RD, dt: 6th June 1986) xvii. Earnest Money Deposit, Additional security Deposit: Earnest Money Deposit, Additional security deposit and withheld amount for the contractors, bills are dealt with E.M.D. should be furnished by the contractors while tendering a work at the rate of 1% of value of contract; and The Additional security deposit will be at the rate of 1% of the estimated value of work as per G.O. Ms. No.581, Finance dt:13-06-1980. The withheld amount in each successive intermediate bills shall eb 5% of the value of work done and in case of lumpsum contracts 2.5% shall be refunded from the with-held amount at the time of final payment. 475 The E.M.D. 1% and additional security deposits 1% shall be released after six months from the date of last check. In case of structural works, the balance 2.5% of with held amount will have to be retained for a period of 2 years from the date of completion / date of last check measurement of work and shall be released on expiry of 2 years after completion of work and an indeminity Bond from the contractor for a further period of three years to establish the quality of work executed as per G.O. Ms. No.1352 Transport Dept. dt:27-11-1985 and G.O. Ms. No.1465 P.W. dt:22-07-1982. For major works like formation of road including metalling and B.T. 2.5% of the value of the contractor may be retained with the Department for a period of one year after completion of work and an indeminity bond shall be obtained for a further period of 2 years. Works like resurfacting and B.T. 2.5% of value of contract may be retained with the department for a period of 6 months only and no indeminity bond to be obtained for any further period as per G.O. Ms. No.73 Transport dt:09-01-1987. DRD‘s Circular RC. No.106883 / 98 TU -1 dt:11-6-1999 xviii. Preparation and sanction of estimates: Estimates in respect of village panchayats or panchayat unions or district panchayats works whether original or maintenance works costing upto rupees fifty thousand shall be prepared by the panchayat union overseer of the respective panchayat union and got technically sanctioned by the Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer(Rural Development) of the respective panchayat union. All estimates costing more than rupees fifty thousand shall be prepared by the Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) with the assistance of the Union Overseer and sent to the Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development) concerned, who shall ensure that administrative and technical sanctions are accorded to the estimates in accordance with rules 5 below. xix. According of administrative sanction and technical sanction to estimates: In respect of estimates including revised estimates for original works, maintenance works and electrical works the authorities competent to accord administrative sanction and technical sanction shall unless the Government has stipulated that the sanction of some other authority is required for a particular scheme or particular fund or above a particular limit, be as specified in Tables I, II, III, IV and V below: as per Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Preparation of plans and estimates for works and mode and conditions of contracts) Rules 1998 and also rules 2007. Panchayat Union Estimate value Authority to accord Administrative sanction Authority to accord Technical Sanction for original works 1. Estimate costing upto rupees ten lakhs Panchayat Union Council (i) Upto rupees One Lakh Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) and Panchayat Raj. (ii) More than rupees one lakh but not more than rupees Five lakhs:- Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj) (iii) More than rupees Five lakhs but not more than rupees Thirty lakhs Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj.) 2. Estimate costing more than rupees ten lakhs but not more than rupees Fifty lakhs. District Collector / 3. Estimate costing more than rupees Fifty lakhs More than rupees thirty lakhs Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) 476 Technical Sanction Sl.No. Competent authority Maintenance works Electrical works 1. Block Engineers / Asst. Engineers (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj) Not more than rupees Twenty Five thousand Not more than rupees Twenty Five thousand 2. Asst. Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj) More than Rs.25 thousand and not more than rupees two Lakhs. More than Rupees twenty Five thousand and not more than rupees Two lakhs. 3. Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat raj) More than Rupees two lakhs and not more than rupees ten lakhs More than rupees two lakhs and not more than ten lakhs. 4. Superintending Engineers (Rural Development and Panchayat raj). More than rupees ten lakhs. More than rupees ten lakhs. Explanations: 1. Relaying of Water Bound Maccadam (WBM) layer and Black topping (BT) Layer as whole will be deemed as original work and not maintenance work. 2. Assistant Engineers and Assistant Executive Engineers in water supply and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak yojana (PMGSY) selling and any person holding Technical posts equivalent to Assistant Engineer and Assistant Executive Engineer are also competent to accord technical sanction. Tender inviting authorities and Tender accepting authorities Sl. No. Category of works Tender inviting authority In case of no tender excess For tender excess up to 5% incase of costing not more than rupees 5 Lakhs (i) For Tender excess more than 5% in case of works costing not more than rupees 5 lakhs or (ii) For any tender excess in case of works costing more than rupees 5 Lakhs 1. General Fund works of Panchayat union B.D.O. (Block Panchayat) Panchayat Union Council Collector Director of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj 2. Scheme works entrusted to Panchayat union B.D.O. (Block Panchayat) Panchayat Union Council Collector Director of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj 3. Scheme works entrusted of B.D.O. (Block Panchayat) B.D.O. (Block Panchayat) B.D.O. (Block Panchayat) Collector Director of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj G.O. Ms. No.286 Rural Development and Panchayatraj Dept. dt:31-12-1998. G.O. Ms. No.203 Rural Development and Panchayatraj Dept. dt:20-12-2007 477 Tender accepting authorities Tender inviting authority If within estimated cost or for tender excess upto 5% in case of individual works costing not more than rupees 25 lakhs or package of works costing not more than rupees 2 crores i. For tender excess more than 5% incase of individual works costly not more than Rs.25 Lakhs or package of works costing not more than Rs.2 crores (or) ii. For any tender excess in case of individual works costing more than rupees 25 Lakhs or package of works costing more than Rs.2 crores. Project Officer, District Rural Development Agency District Collector Director of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj. G.O. Ms. No.203 Rural Development and Panchayatraj Dept. dt:20-12-2007 Measurement and check-measurement of works executed by village panchayat, Panchayat union and district panchayat. The authorities competent to measure and check-measure all original, maintenance and Electrical works done or materials supplied whether by contract or by departmental agency for all works other than National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) works shall be as specified below:- Name of work Measuring officer Check-measuring officer (1) (2) (3) 1. All public works (original, maintenance and electrical works) costing not more than rupees fifty thousand Panchayat Union Overseer Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development). 2. All public works (Original, maintenance and electrical works) costing more than rupees fifty thousand. Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development) b) For works under NREGS:- 1) Bill for value of not more than one lakh Overseen Block Engineer or Asst. Engr (RD) 2) Bill for value of more than one lakh Block Engineer or Asst. Engr (RD) Asst. Exe. Engineer (RD) 478 Authorities Competent to Pass Excesses over Original Estimates Estimate Value Authority Powers Upto rupees fifty thousand Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development) Executive Engineer (Rural Development) Superintending Engineer (Rural Development Government) Without any excess over technical sanction estimate With five percent excess over technical sanction estimate. With ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate More than ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate. More than rupees fifty thousand but not more than rupees three lakhs Executive engineer (Rural Development) Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) Government With five percent excess over technical sanction estimate With ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate More than ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate More than rupees three lakhs but not more than rupees five lakhs Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) Government With ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate More than ten percent excess over technical sanction estimate Exceeding rupees five lakhs Government ___ G.O. Ms. No.286 Rural Development Dept. dt. 31.12.1998. THE TABLE Value or the amount of the work Authority (1) (2) 1. Not exceeding rupees fifty thousand (a) The Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development), if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by not more than three per cent. (b) The Executive Engineer (Rural Development), if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by three per cent but not more than five per cent. (c) The Superintending Engineer (Rural Development), if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by five per cent but not more than fifteen per cent. (d) State Government, if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by more than fifteen percent. 2. Exceeding rupees fifty thousand but not exceeding rupees three lakhs (a) Executive Engineer (Rural Development), if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by not more than five per cent. (b) Superintending Engineer (Rural Development), if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by more than five per cent but not more than fifteen per cent. (c) State Government, if the tender rate exceeds the estimate ate by more than fifteen per cent. 479 3. Exceeding rupees three lakhs but not exceeding rupees five lakhs (a) Superintending Engineer (Rural Development), if the ‗tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by not more than fifteen per cent. (b) State Government, if the tender rate exceeds the estimate rate by more exceeding rupees than fifteen per cent. 4. Exceeding rupees five lakhs State Government G.O. Ms. No.286 Rural Development Dept. dt:31-12-1998 xx. Mode and conditions of contracts: Tenders shall be called for in respect of every work which is to be executed by or on behalf of village panchayat, panchayat union council, district panchayat, as the case may be on contract and the value of the amount of which is rupees five thousand and above. Any work, the estimated cost of which does not exceed rupees five thousand may be entrusted to a village panchayat within a panchayat union and district panchayat without calling for tenders at rates not exceeding estimate rates. POWER TO DISPENSE WITH CALLING OF TENDERS: In respect of works, the value or amount of which is rupees five thousand and above, village panchayat, panchayat union council and district panchayat, as the case may be, may dispense with the calling of tenders in the following cases and entrust the work at rates not exceeding estimate rates:- In the case of any work entrusted for execution for the rates not exceeding annual maintenance, contract fixed by the Government specifically for this purpose; In the case of a supplemental maintenance work relating to road which is found necessary after the annual maintenance contract for that road has been settled, if the contract‘ amount of the supplemental maintenance work does not exceed fifty per cent of the amount of the original maintenance amount or rupees two thousand five hundred, whichever is less; In the case of any work to which a village panchayat contributes not less than twenty five per cent of the estimate cost either from its own resources or by collecting contribution in cash from the public, the work may be entrusted to the village panchayat in which the work lies, if the panchayat passes a resolution to that effect, subject to the condition that where it is not possible to collect a twenty five per cent cash contribution in advance, the contribution amount may be deducted from the bills at a rate not exceeding twenty five per cent of cash bill. In the case of any work to which a sponsor contributes not less than twenty five per cent of the estimate cost in cash if he expresses a desire to execute the work and if the panchayat gives prior approval for entrusting it to such sponsor by passing a resolution, the work may be entrusted to such sponsor. Provided that no part of the contribution which the village panchayat or panchayat union council or district panchayat, as the case may be, may make, shall be taken credit for, to make up to the twenty five per cent of the contribution of the sponsor; Provided further that the sponsor shall not entrust the execution of the works to any contractor. In the case of any work other than those referred to in clauses (a), (b). (c) and (d), the work may be entrusted to a Labour Contract Co-operative Society functioning in the panchayat development block at rates not exceeding estimate rates; Nothing contained in these rules shall affect the mode of entrustment and execution of works under State Scheme or Centrally Sponsored Scheme, for which specific orders in the entrustment of works are issued. In cases not falling under clauses (a) to (d) of rule 8, tenders may be dispensed with on the ground of urgency or for any other special reason to be recorded in writing by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be:- if the value or the amount of the work docs not exceed rupees fifty thousand with the previous approval of the Executive Engineer (Rural Development) on the direction from the Collector of the district concerned 480 xxi. Power to entrust the works without tender: Where tenders are not called for or are dispensed with, the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, shall except in cases falling under clause (a) to (d) of rule 8, get the work done through a contractor selected from the register of contractors at rates which shall not ordinarily exceed the sanctioned estimate rates. Where on the ground of urgency or for other special reason it is proposed to allow rates exceeding the sanctioned estimate rates, the previous written approval of the authority competent under these rules to approve the acceptance of tenders at such rates shall be obtained. Provided that any such work may be entrusted to a person in the locality who is not a registered contractor, but who is interested, it its execution, if in the opinion of the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, its execution through such agency is desirable and if the value or the amount does not exceed rupees two thousand: Provided further that the selection of contractors for works, the value or the amount of which is rupees two thousand or less shall be made by the Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development): Provided also that in cases falling under clause (c) of rules, the supplemental maintenance work shall be entrusted to the contractor for the original maintenance work at the same rates as for the original maintenance work. xxii. Dispense with further call of tender: Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, may upto such date as the State Government may by general or special order specify from time to time dispense with further call of tenders either when no tender is received in the first instance or only high premium tenders which are not considered reasonable are received and are rejected- if the value or the amount of the work does not exceed rupees five lakhs with the approval of the village panchayat or panchayat union council or district panchayat. as the case may be; if the value or the amount of the work exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not exceed rupees ten lakhs with the approval of the collector of the district concerned. if the value or the amount of the work exceeds rupees ten lakhs but does not exceed rupees one crore with the approval of the Director of Rural Development; and if the value or the amount of the work exceeds rupees one crore with the approval of the State Government. In case tenders are not dispensed with under sub-rule (I), the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, negotiate with the tenderers in order to entrust the work to the most suitable tenderer having regard to all the local conditions and accept an offer at rate other than specified in the tender with approval of the collector or the district concerned:- if the value or the amount of the work does not exceed rupees five lakhs with the concurrence of village panchayat or panchayat union council or district panchayat as the case may be; if the value or the amount of the work exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not exceed rupees ten lakhs with the concurrence of the collector of the district concerned; if the value or the amount of the work exceeds rupees ten lakhs and does not exceed rupees one crore with the approval of Director of Rural Development; and if the value of the work exceeds rupees one crore with the ,concurrence of the State Government. XXIII) REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS:- Any person desirous of being registered as a contractor shall apply to the concerned village panchayat or panchayat union councilor district panchayat, as the case may be, enclosing a receipt from the village panchayat or panchayat union or district panchayat office, as the case may be, for the ‗fee fixed under sub-rule (4) and stating his qualifications and previous experience. The village panchayat or panchayat union council or district panchayat, may fix a fee not exceeding rupees five hundred to be paid by an applicant for registration as a contractor. On receipt of an application under sub-rule (3). the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, shall refer such application to block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development), who shall make a full enquiry and submit 481 the application to the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, with the record of the enquiry made by him and his views on rejections or recommendation in regard to the particulars mentioned in columns (4) and (5) of the register. The executive authority or commissioner or secretary, shall place the details of enquiry along with the application for consideration of village panchayat or panchayat union councilor district panchayat, who shall pass orders on the application after which the same shall be entered in the register. The said register and connected records shall be made available for the perusal of the audit or supervising officer, who shall bring to the notice of the Inspector and Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) of any material irregularities. The Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) shall cause the material irregularities to be enquired into and to place the details before the Inspector, who after giving an opportunity to the concerned executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, shall pass order which will be binding on the respective panchayat. The names of the contractors may be removed from the register of contractors by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, for any misconduct or for any financial incapacity or for any other reasons: Provided that before ordering the removal of the name of any contractor from the register, a notice in writing shall be given to him to show cause against such removal and his explanation be obtained in writing for consideration, and place the details for consideration of the village panchayat or panchayat union council or district panchayat. xxiv. Tender procedure : Subject to the provisions of rule 18, tenders in sealed covers shall be invited by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be in the most open public and transparent manner possible- by displaying the tender notice in Tamil on the notice board of the village panchayat or panchayat union or district panchayat, and in such other places as the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, may direct; by sending copies of the tender notice to the Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural . Development) and Executive Engineer (Rural Development) for displaying in the notice board of their offices concerned; and by publication of the tender notice in the District Gazette. Provided that tender notice in respect of a work, if the value of which exceeds rupees ten lakhs and does not exceed rupees twenty five lakhs shall be published in two tamil newspapers at the district level. Every notice published under sub-rule (1) shall state When and where the contract documents may be inspected; The precise form of tendering, that is, whether it shall be at specified percentage below or above estimate rates, or whether definite rate issued be quoted for each item of work included in the schedule; When and where tenders are to be submitted; When and where they are to be opened; The amount of earnest money which shall accompany the tender and the amount and nature of security required in case the tender is accepted; and The authority competent to accept the tender, reserve the right to reject any or all received without assigning any reasons. a) Precise form of tender: The precise form of tendering, namely, whether it shall be at specified percentage below or above the estimate rates, or whether definite rates shall be quoted for each item of work included in the schedule independently of the rates provided for in the sanctioned estimate, shall be decided by the,executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be. Contractors who are required to tender on percentage basis, may be permitted to examine the estimates for a work, but the data statement showing the actual cost of materials and the distance of the leads on which the estimate is really based shall not be shown to them nor shall it form part of the contract documents. 482 b) Valid Tenders: No Tender shall ordinarily be treated as valid unless it is accompanied either by the earnest money specified in the tender notice or by a receipt in token of the party having remitted the amount of the earnest money into the panchayat office concerned. A separate list of all sums deposited as earnest money shall be maintained under the signature of the officer opening the tender. c. Tender from the registered contractors: Only tenders from the registered contractors shall be considered. This condition shall not be enforced in the case of capital works the value or amount of which exceeds rupees fifty thousand in the case of steel work or incases in which the Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) or Block Engineer certifies that the work, requires the use of special plant of materials and specially trained labourers and that tenders from unregistered contractors may be considered. In the case of capital works the value or amount of which exceeds rupees fifty thousand, tenders from engineering firms of standing and from contractors registered in or outside the village panchayat or panchayat union or district panchayat area for such capital works may be considered. A tender register shall be maintained in the village panchayat, panchayat union and district panchayat offices respectively in Form II as appended to these rules and such register shall be treated as confidential. d. Forfeiture of EMD:- The amount of earnest money to be deposited shall be as specified in tender notice. In case of the contractors failing to furnish the required security within the appointed time after the acceptance of his tender or until the sums due to him form a sufficient guarantee, or fails to execute the work as per the agreement, the earnest money deposit shall be forfeited. e. Opening of sealed tender cover: The executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, or any responsible official authorised by him in this behalf shall at the time and place specified for the purpose, open the scaled covers containing the tender In the presence of two officials In that office in addition to the presence of such of the tenderer or their authorised agents as may be present. Until the sealed covers containing tenders are so opened, they shall be kept in the personal custody of the executive authority or the official authorised by him to open the tenders. All corrections in each tender which may have been made by the tenderer should be attested by him. If there are corrections in the tender unattested by the tenderer a note of such corrections shall be made on the tender itself when it is opened. The executive authority or the official authorised by him to open the tenders shall enter the total number of tenders received in the tender register. against each work. f. Tender register: After the lenders are opened, they shall be tabulated and posted in a tender register maintained in the village panchayat or ‗panchayat union or district panchayat office, in Form II appended to these rules. The executive authority or commissioner or secretary, shall scrutinise the entries in the register and certify that the tabulation is correct with reference to the original tenders which shall be preserved and made available for the purpose of audit. A contractor who withdraws his tender after the acceptance of tender by competent authority without valid reasons to be decided by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, shall be liable to have his name removed from the register of contractors for a period ranging from one to five years. The orders of executive authority or commissioner or secretary, removing the name of the contractor from . such register shall be communicated to the contractor concerned by the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, An appeal shall lie to the Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) against the order of the executive authority or Commissioner or secretary, Such appeal shall be preferred through the Block Engineer or Assistant Engineer (Rural Development) and the executive authority or commissioner Or secretary and the Executive Engineer (Rural Development), within seven days from the date of receipt by the contractor of the orders of the executive authority or commissioner or secretary. . The orders of the Superintending Engineer (Rural Development) on such appeal shall be final. The Government have examined the proposal of the DRD and Panchayat Raj for appointing authorities competent to scrutinize the tender proposals before putting up to the Tender Accepting Authority and direct that the authority to scrutinize the Tender proposls of all the works shall be as specified in the Table below: 483 Authority to scrutinize the Tender proposal Sl.No. Authority Value of work 1. Block Engineer / Assistant Engineer (R.D. & P.Raj) Note more than Rupees one Lakhs. 2. Assistant Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj More than Rupees one Lakhs and not more than Rupees 5 Lakhs. 3. Executive Engineer (Rural Development and Panchayat Raj) More than Rupees five Lakhs. (G.O. Ms. No.204 Rural Development and Panchayat Raj (PR-1) Dept. dt:24-12-2007) xxv. Acceptance of tender: The lowest tender shall be accepted. Where it is considered undesirable to accept the lowest tender the reasons shall be clearly recorded in writing by the authority competent to accept the tender and the case shall be disposed of in the manner specified in rules 23 and 24. Where the capacity for the work and the integrity of a tenderer are not known, his tender need not necessarily be rejected. Such additional security not exceeding ten per cent of the contract amount as the authority competent to accept the tender considers necessary shall however be taken from the tenderer if the circumstances warrant such a course. Where the lowest tender is rejected, the next lowest tender shall be considered. If it is considered undesirable to accept that tender also, the next higher tender shall be considered. In every case of rejection of a tender under this sub- rule, the reasons therefore shall be recorded in writing by the authority competent to accept tenders. In no case shall a tender be accepted at rates other than those specified in the tenders. In cases, where the authority competent to accept the tender considers the rate for certain items are pitched too high in the lowest tender, he may negotiate with the above tenderer with the approval of the next superior authority and secure reasonable rates for those items without higher sanction. There shall be no avoidable delay in the disposal of tenders after they are opened. In cases where the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, is competent to dispose of tenders without obtaining concurrence of others, the executive authority or commissioner or secretary, as the case may be, shall do so ordinarily within a week of the date on which they are opened and in any case within a period not exceeding one month. In other cases no tenders shall remain a un disposed of for a period exceeding one month. In other cases no tenders shall remain un disposed of for a period exceeding two months from the date on which they are opened. Passing of orders: The executive authority or commissioner or secretary, with the approval of the village panchayat or panchayat union councillor district panchayat, shall pass orders in accordance with the provisions of rule 22 in the case of works the value or the amount of which does not exceed estimate rate. If the lowest tender is not accepted and the person making such a tender is a person competent according to the register of contractors to execute the works, the matter shall be referred to the Executive Engineer (Rural Development) concerned and the decision of the Executive Engineer (Rural Development) shall be final. The reference and the order thereon shall contain clear and convincing reasons for not accepting the lowest tender. Exceeding the estimate amount: In the case of works the value or the amount of work which exceeds the estimate amount the tender shall be settled after obtaining concurrence from the authority competent to sanction or as specified in rule 25. Acceptance of tender for special reasons: Tenders which exceed the estimated rate or amount shall not ordinarily be accepted. Where on the ground of urgency or for other special reasons, if it is proposed to accept such tenders, the previous approval of the authority specified in column (2) of the Table below shall be obtained:· Transparent Execution of works: All works executed by the respective panchayats shall be placed before the village panchayat, panchayat union council and district panchayat, as the case may be, and necessary follow up action taken. 484 A display board on each work exceeding rupees fifty thousand executed by the contractor or otherwise in village panchayat, panchayat union, or district panchayat, shall be placed at the work site by the contractor or the executor executing the works at his cost as part of the work contracted with the following details:- (a) name of the scheme; (b) name of the work (including year of sanction), (c) estimate value; (d) name of the contractor; (e) date of commencement of work and (f) date of completion of work. xxvi. Utilisation of Surplus Funds: A minimum balance of Rs.5 lakhs should be kept as reserv under General Fund Account (ordinary) and then this has to be excluded for the purpose of arriving at surplus for utilisation. The District Collectors are authorised to anction an expenditure up to 50%. of the surplus fund after keeping minimum balance of 5 lakhs as reserve. Proposals in excess of the Financial limit of 50% of the surplus funds referred to above shall be sanctioned by the D.R.D.The priority of item of works to be taken up shall be as follows. The administrative approval for the works carried out from the surplus funds shall be as follows: The individual works up to 5 lakhs - Panchayat Union Council Above 5 lakhs and up to 10 lakhs - District Collector Above 10 lakhs - 1 Crore - Director of Rural Development Above 1 Crore - Government The Collector may incur expenditure up to 50% of the surplus fund. (G.O. Ms. No.85 / R.D. Dept. dt:06-05-1998) The Collectors are authorised to accord sanction for the utilisation of surplus funds for the above items of work in the order of priority, subject to the following conditions: A minimum of 10 percent of the cash balances should be kept by the panchayat union councils in their budget. This minimum cash balance should be computed by excluding the grants, debts and endowments in the budget. A minimum amount of Rs.5 lakhs should also be kept in the General funds as reserve so as to provide for any unforeseen expenditure such as increase in D.A., for the staff, etc, during the course of the year. All proposals for the utilisation of surplus funds should be sent to the Collector with requisite resolutions of the panchayat union councils with detailed list of works and their approximate cost. (G.O.Ms.No.1376, R.D& L.A., dated.30th Mary 1974) Upto 50% the Panchayat Union Council may accord administration sanction and incur expenditure. (G.O. Ms. No.85 RD Dept. dt:6-5-1998) Procedure for incurring expenditure for surplus funds of Panchayat Union Councils i) Water Supply Scheme: Distribution system to serve Harijan colonies alone should be taken up with the concurrence of D.R.D. public taps in select points only. should be provided. There should be no street by extension. ii) School Buildings:-Construction of buildings including construction of additional school building to the Pt. Union schools. Construction of first buildings in each school will get first priority. iii) Road works: improvements to roads such as gravelling, metalling vested with the Pt. Union or Panchayats. construction of rivertments, road dams on the roads vested with Panchayat Union and Panchayats. Aforestation in Panchayat lands:-It should be remunerative to Panchayats and Pt. Unions. iv) Simple drainage works. v) Construction of Thrashing floors (G.O.Ms.No.310, RD & LA dt: 03-03-81) 485 The sanction for the utilisation of surplus fund by the Collector is restricted to the following items of works: a) Direct Purchase centre and Godowns to be operated by the civil supplies corporations and subject to the guaranteed economic rent being given by Tamil Nadu Civil supplies corporation b) Drinking water supply i) Provision of wells including tube-Wells and deep borewells, ii) Deepening of wells in cases where the ground water cell gives clearance of the Asst. Geologist of the Technical cell attached to the collectors office. iii) construction of Ground level Reservoirs iv) construction of over Head Tanks without a distribution system in accordance with the procedure indicated under the village works programme and subject to obtaining the permission of the D.R.D. wherever necessary under village works programme v) Improvements to existing wells such as construction of plat-forms. c)i) Improvements to roads such as gravel1ing, metaling black topping vested with the Pt. Unions or Panchayats. ii) constructions of culverts, bridges, causeways revetments, road, dams on the roads vested with Pt. Union and Panchayats. d) Constructions of building including construction of Additional school buildings to the Pt. Union Schools. e) The Pt. Union whose financial position is found surplus as defined in G.O.Ms.No.1531 RD & LA dt: 29-07-76 are permited to take up the work ‗of sinking community wells for irrigation purposes for the benefit of the small formers. The pt. Unions should take up each well work with the prior approval of the Collectors Concerned and that the total cost. of each well work should not exceed Rs. 40,000. (G.O.MS.No.641, RD & LA dt: 29-04-78) Note: T.V. Sets to Panchayats, Town Panchayats by Utilising the surplus General funds of Panchayat Union and the recoupment negatived. (Govt. Lr. NO.64272/A/Pn/O-1 dt: 20-02-91 DRD.) The proforma for arriving at the financial position of the Pt. Union for purpose of sanction of schemes from Gl. Funds has been prescribed by Government in G.O.Ms.No.64I RD& LA dt: 29-04-78. DRO‘s circular Roc. 167627/ Acts. VI·2176-3 dt:22-09-76 and circular Even NO.dt: 15-12-76.