1.
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AS
Accounting Standard
CA
Chartered Accountant
CMU
Change Management Unit
CV
Curriculum Vitae
CWIP
Capital Work in Progress
DFID
Department for International Development, UK
DLB
Directorate of Local Bodies
F.Y.
Financial Year
FIFO
First-in-First-out
GAAP
Generally Accepted Accounting Policies
GIS
Geographical Information System
GO
Government Order 
GoWB
Government of West Bengal
HUDCO
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited
ICAI
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ISC
Interim Support Consultants
KMA
Kolkata Metropolitan Area
KMDA
Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority
KMC
Kolkata Municipal Corporation
KUSP
Kolkata Urban Services for the Poor
LIC
Life Insurance Corporation of India
MAD
Municipal Affairs Department
MB
Measurement Book
MED
Municipal Engineering Directorate 
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
MPLADS
Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
No.
Number
PF
Provident Fund
PWD
Public Works Department
RD
Recurring Deposit
RTO
Regional Transport Office
SLM
Straight Line Method
ToR
Terms of Reference
ULB
Urban Local Bodies
UK
United Kingdom
2.
BACKGROUND
2.1.
In terms of the recommendations of the CAG's Task Force on Accounting 
Reforms to be introduced in urban local bodies which were accepted at the 
national level, the Government of West Bengal has decided to introduce 
accrual based Double Entry System in all urban local bodies.
2.2.
In the first instance it has been decided that this would be introduced in the 40 
ULBs of Kolkata Metropolitan Area (except Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation), with support from the DFID assisted Kolkata Urban Services 
for the Poor programme. Gradually the accrual based double entry 
accounting system shall be introduced in all ULBs of West Bengal.
2.3
First step for switching over to the Double Entry System of Accounting is to 
st
prepare Opening Balance Sheet as on 1  April, 2004.   
3.
OBJECTIVE 
3.1.
The objective of this document is to provide guidelines to prepare opening 
st
balance sheet as on 1  April 2004 (hereinafter referred to as "balance sheet"). 
These guidelines will be followed by all the executing agencies in 
preparation of balance sheet for the ULBs concerned. 
3.2.
The document covers guidelines for recognition of assets and liabilities for 
the purpose of opening balance sheet. This would help in achieving 
uniformity in the preparation of balance sheet by the executing agencies. 
3.3.
The opening balance sheet as on April 1, 2005 will be prepared by adding the 
effect of transactions entered during F.Y. 04-05 (according to double entry 
principles) to the current balance sheet being prepared. 
3.4.
The guidelines are inclusive in nature and have been issued only for the 
material items. All effort has been made in making the guidelines as 
comprehensive as possible. In cases of minor issues, the executing agency 
will have the authority to take a decision after intimating the same to the 
CMU. In cases where there are major or material issues, a pre-approval from 
CMU and GoWB (if necessary) will be required. 
4.
THREE STEPS TO BALANCE SHEET
5.
ACCEPTANCE OF BALANCE SHEET
5.1.
Preparation of opening balance sheet will be regularly monitored by CMU or 
any other authority as  may be decided by the Government. The balance 
sheet will be first approved and accepted by CMU or any such authority. Any 
comments of CMU or any such authority will have to be suitably 
incorporated. 
5.2.
The approved balance sheet will then be placed before the Board of 
Councillors of the ULB and will be approved and adopted by them. 
5.3.
The opening balance sheet shall also be submitted to the Accountant General 
(Local Bodies Audit), West Bengal, for their information.
6.
COMMON GUIDELINES
6.1.
All assets which are under the ownership and permissive possession of the 
ULB will be accounted for. Similarly all liabilities to be paid will also be 
brought in the books. In case of Hospitals and schools, if the asset is under a 
separate legal entity, then it would not form a part of the ULB's balance sheet
6.2.
The separate legal entity includes hospitals, dispensaries, schools, maternity 
centres, nursing home formed as a society, trust, co-operative society, or a 
company formed under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956.
6.3.
The mere maintenance of a register should not be taken as sufficient for the 
purpose of arriving at the balance. The Executing agency will have to check 
the authenticity of all the entries. All entries shall be cross-checked with 
source documents before its compilation in the balance sheet.
6.4.
Assets constructed/ purchased by some other agency/ Government and 
handed over to the ULB shall be accounted  for on the basis of the ownership 
of the asset. If the ownership remains with the other agency, then it will not 
be recognised as an asset in the books of the ULB. If there has been a transfer 
VERIFICATION
COMPILATION
UPDATING
· Updating of records 
and registers
· Preparation of 
r e c o r d s  a n d  
registers
· Complete list of 
assets and liabilities
· Physical verifi- 
cation
· Cross-checking
· Checking with 
originals
· Valuation/ costing
· F i l l i n g  i n  t h e  
formats
· Compilation of 
f i g u r e s  f r o m  
various records and 
registers
· Certificate
· Approval by Board 
of councillors
of ownership without any consideration, then the asset shall be valued at Re. 
1/- and recognised in the opening balance sheet. The balance sheet shall 
contain  disclosure in the form of Notes with respect to following:- 
i.
Assets, which are in ULB's possession and derive economic benefits, 
but the ownership of which does not vest in it e.g. market constructed by 
Urban Development Department and handed over to the ULB with a 
right to collect rent, title deed not being executed.  
ii.
The assets which are handed over to the ULB, but the title deed has not 
been handed over e.g. assets purchased/constructed by KMDA and 
handed over to the ULB for use and maintenance.
iii.
Receivables from taxes, etc. not collected due to litigation.
iv.
In case Demand and Collection Register is not updated or prepared, the 
ULB will have to prepare it and assess the amount of arrears.
6.5.
Revenue shall be recognised only when it is measurable and there is  
reasonable certainty of collection. If the levy of any income or user charge is 
in dispute and any legal case is pending against it, it shall not be taken as the 
income of the ULBs.
6.6.
The details of such Court cases and the amount if measurable shall be 
disclosed in the Notes to Accounts. 
6.7.
Revaluation of assets is not intended in this exercise. The Executing agency 
shall not go in for a revaluation mode and valuation shall be done on the basis 
of actual price paid/ payable.
6.8.
Principle of conservatism shall be followed while preparing the opening 
balance sheet. 
6.9.
All the figures shall be in Rupees Thousands with decimals upto two places.
6.10. In the case of building/construction of an asset by an external Govt. 
controlled agency out of Govt. grants with the pre-condition that the asset 
thus built/ constructed would be immediately handed over to the ULB, the 
whole of the capital cost of the asset as well as the grant should be shown in 
the books of accounts of the said ULB on transfer of the asset.
7.
IDENTIFICATION OF ASSET
7.1.
The first task to be undertaken  is identification of assets. Assets are spread 
over the entire ULB and an effort will be required by the ULB in identifying 
all assets both over and under the ground. Based on this identification, the 
Executing agency will undertake their task of physical verification.
7.2.
Identification will be done by the Engineering and Accounts Departments 
based on their records, physical verification, books of accounts and GIS. The 
ULB can also take the assistance of the Councillors and other departments in 
its effort for identification of assets.  Identification of assets will include 
listing of all material assets of the ULB including land, buildings, roads, 
water and sewerage assets, etc. It will also include listing and defining the 
condition and location of assets.  
7.3.
The process of identification of assets shall include the updation of records 
and registers prescribed under the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and 
Accounting) Rules, 1999 and formats as prescribed in the guidelines. 
8.
PHYSICAL VERIFICATION
8.1.
Physical verification needs to be done only of material items. Items which are 
material e.g. 20% of items having 80% of value and high in value 
(replacement cost above Rs. 50,000/-) will be physically verified. The 
Executing agency shall use a representative sample and conduct physical 
verification. Use of GIS maps will be done for physical verification to the 
extent available. 
8.2.
In cases where a normal check and physical verification is possible, the 
Executing agency shall take proactive steps in ensuring that a physical 
verification is conducted.
8.3.
The Executing agency should keep a record of all assets physically verified.
9.
VALUATION OF ASSETS
9.1.
Valuation of fixed assets will be done as per the following order of 
preference. The rates of depreciation have been dealt with in another section:
9.2.
If both the cost and date of purchase/ construction is available/ascertainable  
- Original cost less depreciation
9.3.
If cost is not available /ascertainable but the date of construction/ purchase is 
available:
9.3.1.
If the asset has outlived its estimated useful life, then it will be 
valued at Re. 1/-. Estimation of useful life will be done by the 
internal engineers of the ULB where annexure-6 to this guidelines 
is not exhaustive.
9.3.2.
Buildings
9.3.2.1. If the building has not outlived its useful life, then valuation will be 
done based on per sq. feet rate or plinth area rate of that year. The 
MED/ competent Government Authority will issue an order 
specifying the plinth area rate or per sq feet rate to standardise the 
valuation. The internal engineers will conduct the exercise of 
estimation of value and provide it to the Executing agency. The 
value so obtained would be depreciated to arrive at depreciated 
value as on April 1, 2004.
9.3.2.2. In case Standard Plinth area or per sq foot rate is not available, 
current replacement cost based on the recent plinth area rate or per 
sq. foot rate as prescribed above This will be deflated till the year of 
construction based on wholesale price index (index rates are 
provided in Annexure 5) and then depreciated. 
9.3.3.
Other assets
9.3.3.1. Current replacement cost will be used. This will be deflated till the 
year of construction/ purchase based on wholesale price index 
(index rates are provided in Annexure 5) and then depreciated. 
Current rates from other manufacturers can be taken e.g. in case of 
vehicles.
9.4.
In case neither the cost nor the date of purchase/ construction is available, 
valuation will be at Re 1/- , the same being considered as the residual value.
9.5.
In case of land where the original documents are not available, valuation can 
be ascertained from relevant records of the Land Revenue Department or 
transaction value of a similar plot in the similar area around the estimated 
year of transaction .
10.
FORMATS
10.1. Format for preparation of balance sheet and its schedule has been provided. 
The Executing agency will prepare the balance sheet in the same format and 
shall not make any changes in it without the permission of CMU or the 
appropriate authority. The significant accounting policies are also annexed 
to the formats.
st
10.2. A format for the "Certificate accompanying opening balance sheet as on 1  
April 2004" is attached. The Executing agency authenticating and certiifying 
the Balance Sheet will give this certificate along with the opening balance 
sheet.
10.3. Format of issue log for changes to this guidelines is also attached. 
10.4. The figure in formats for opening balance sheet, shall be in Rs. thousands 
with decimals up to two places.
10.5. The West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999 does not 
prescribe the formats for the following class of assets. Separate formats are 
being prescribed here, which shall be used in drawing up the opening balance 
sheet  
i.
Vehicles 
ii. Buildings 
iii. Furniture and fixtures
iv. Office and other equipments
v.
Statues and valuable works of art and antiquities
vi. Heritage buildings
vii. Infrastructure assets
10.6. The items to be filled in the formats will be taken from the existing registers 
maintained, e.g. list of vehicles can be obtained from Register of Stock and 
Stores. It has to be noted that assets taken out from the existing records and 
filled in these new ones, should not be included for valuation twice. The 
following formats are attached as Annexure 7 to the guidelines. 
11.
FIXED ASSETS
11.1. Fixed assets in the case of ULBs can broadly be classified into the following 
categories:   
Land and Buildings 
·
Land 
·
Buildings 
Statues and heritage assets 
·
Statues and valuable works of art and antiquities
·
Heritage Buildings
Infrastructure assets 
·
Roads and Pavements 
·
Bridges, culverts and flyovers
·
Subways and causeways
·
Sewerage and Drainage 
·
Waterways 
·
Water supply and reservoirs
·
Deep tube wells
·
Parks and playgrounds
·
Street light posts and Public Lighting
Equipments 
·
Plant and Machinery 
·
Vehicles 
·
Office and other equipments
·
Furniture and fixtures 
Livestock
Intangibles 
·
Software license fees  
11.2. Valuation of fixed assets
11.2.1.
Fixed assets will be recorded at cost. Cost is the amount of cash or 
cash equivalent paid or fair value of other consideration given to 
acquire an asset at the time of its acquisition or construction. All 
normal expenditure for making an item of asset ready for its 
intended use is capitalised. It also includes ancillary and necessary 
charges to place the asset in its intended location and condition for 
use e.g. freight and transportation charges, site preparation 
expenditure, professional fees and legal claim directly attributable 
to asset acquisition. Razing and removal cost (less salvage value) of 
structures located on land purchased as a building site are added to 
the cost. 
11.2.2.
For assets having useful life of more than 20 years, the residual 
value shall be considered as Re 1/- for the purpose of preparation of 
st
Opening Balance Sheet as on 1  April, 2004, in case the original 
cost cannot be ascertained.
11.3. Repairs, renovation and replacements, should be capitalised only if such 
expenditure increases the capacity or operating efficiency, or extends the 
useful economic life of the asset. In case of buildings, improvements causing 
major changes in the existing structure will be capitalised.
11.4. Parks and Playgrounds shall be capitalized under two categories, viz
(i)
Land pertaining to Parks and Playgrounds including the cost of 
development of land shall be booked under 'Land'.
(ii)
Other amenities of the Parks and Playgrounds should be capitalised 
under the sub-head "Parks and Playgrounds" under the head 
"Infrastructure Assets".  
However, any building/ structures/ plant and machinery etc. constructed/ 
installed in the Parks and Playgrounds and used for other purposes should not 
be booked under the sub-head 'Parks and Playgrounds'. The same should be 
booked under the appropriate heads/ sub-heads of assets.
11.5. Land 
·
At present the details with regard to land are being maintained by ULBs 
in Form 90, "Register of Lands", of the West Bengal Municipal 
(Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999, hereinafter referred to as 
"Rules". The form captures sufficient information with regard to the 
situation, area, purpose and the way under which the asset is held i.e. 
whether acquired, taken on lease or taken on rent
·
All the land under the ownership or permissive possession of the ULB 
will form a part of the Opening Balance Sheet.
·
Leasehold lands acquired by the ULB are taken as a part of assets at a 
total value payable as lease charges over the entire lease period and 
amortised equally over the lease period. 
·
The information kept by the ULBs in the register of lands needs to be 
verified and cross checked from the books of accounts and agreement to 
authenticate and substantiate the information kept in the land register. 
The information needs to be cross-verified specially with regard to the 
date of purchase, cost of purchase and mode of purchase. 
·
The land register has not been maintained and updated by most of the 
ULBs. The Executing agency shall conduct physical verification of all 
lands. The ULB will provide all technical assistance for conducting the 
physical verification. The GIS and records with the engineering 
department will give the details of all lands within the jurisdiction of the 
ULB.  
·
The following recognition criteria shall be applied to arrive at the value 
of the lands
·
Land acquired through purchase 
·
The land will be recorded at the purchase price paid/payable and 
other incidental costs such as registration charges incurred to bring 
the asset to its present location and condition.
·
Lands acquired through compulsory acquisition 
·
The land will be recorded at the total compensation paid/ payable 
for the acquisition of the land. If the amount of compensation was  
in dispute, then the amount that will be recorded would be based on 
documentary proof. The extra amount, if determinable that may be 
payable will be shown as contingent liabilities and will be added to 
the cost of land when it is finally paid to the previous owner. 
·
Land acquired against non-payment of taxes
·
The cost to be booked will be the unpaid amount of taxes after it has 
been finalised.
·
Land acquired free of cost or donated land
·
If the land has been acquired by ULB free of cost from 
government/individuals or has been donated to the ULB, then such 
lands would be recorded at nominal value of Re. 1/-. However any 
developmental work done should be capitalised at cost.
·
Vested government lands 
·
Where the ownership of the lands has not been transferred in favour 
of the ULB, but the land is in the permissive possession of the ULB,  
such lands should be included in the Register of Land with Re. 1/- as 
its value. However, there should be a clear mention in the Register 
that in case the Government takes back the land at any point of time 
in future, reversal of entry shall be made in the Register of Lands. 
Cost of developing such lands, is any, should be booked under the 
sub-head 'Land'.
·
Land improvement 
·
Original cost of any improvement to land such as land development 
and land filling will be capitalised as part of the cost of the land.
·
Land acquired through government grants 
·
If the ULB has purchased land from the government grants, then the 
cost of the land will be shown at gross value i.e. cost paid/ payable 
or as determined according to the above guidelines. The grant 
received will be shown separately as a liability. 
11.6. Buildings 
·
In the case of ULBs the buildings shall include office buildings, school 
buildings, public conveniences, hospitals, dispensaries, maternity and 
child welfare centres, shopping complex, town hall buildings, 
community centres, staff quarters, rest house, milk dairy, workshop 
buildings, fire stations, stores building, covered taxi stands, covered 
parking areas, bus stands amongst others.
·
Presently the cost of buildings and other assets, if they are being 
constructed, are booked in Form 58, Register of Works. If the Buildings 
have been purchased/ transferred, then the ULBs maintain the details in 
the Assets Register.
·
Buildings purchased
o
The purchase cost of the building shall include the purchase price 
cost and incidental costs such as registration charges and other costs 
incurred to bring the asset to its present location and condition.
·
Building constructed 
o
If the building has been constructed, then the cost of the building 
will be taken as the cost of construction. This can be obtained from 
Register of Works.
·
Grants received in respect of buildings
o
If any grant has been received by the ULB for construction or 
purchase of the building, then the cost of the building will be taken 
as gross amount and the grant will be shown separately as a Source 
of Fund in the opening balance sheet. The cost of building and the 
amount of grant would be reduced proportionately each year by the 
amount of depreciation.  
11.7. Statues and Heritage Assets
11.7.1.
Statues and valuable works of art and antiquities will be valued at 
the original cost and no depreciation shall be charged thereon. In 
case, however, the original cost is not available or the items have 
been gifted to the ULB by some other person/ authorities, the value 
should be taken at Re 1/.
11.7.2.
Heritage buildings declared through Gazette Notification should be 
booked under this head and should be valued at book value/cost of 
the material date. No depreciation should be charged on such 
buildings. In case, however the book value /cost of the material date 
is not available or the items have been gifted to the ULB by some 
other person/ authorities, the value should be taken at Re 1/-. 
Material date in this case would be the date of Gazette Notification.
11.8. Infrastructure assets 
11.8.1.
Infrastructure assets: Infrastructure assets are long-lived capital 
assets that normally are stationary in nature and can be preserved 
for a significantly greater number of years than most capital assets. 
Examples of infrastructure assets include roads, bridges, tunnels, 
drainage system, water and sewerage systems, dams, Deep tube 
wells, Parks and Playgrounds, Street Light Posts etc. 
·
Infrastructure assets are classified as follows:
·
Roads and pavements
·
Bridges, culverts and flyovers
·
Subways and causeways
·
Sewerage and drainage
·
Waterways
·
Water supply and reservoirs
·
Deep tube-wells
·
Parks and Playgrounds
·
Street light posts and Public Lighting
·
Details for infrastructural assets is available in the register showing the list of 
all public streets, parks or transport terminals under section 81 of The West 
Bengal Municipal Act, 1993.
·
Cost of land shall not be taken here. It will be included in the valuation of 
lands.
·
Cost of construction of infrastructure assets will be available in the "Register 
of works". 
11.9. Plant and Machinery
·
The cost of plant and machinery will include, besides purchase price, 
costs such as site preparation costs and installation costs.
·
Presently the information with regard to plant and machinery is 
captured in the following records :- 
o
Register of tools and plants, maintained in accordance with Form 
no 91 of the Rules, captures information with regard to tools and 
plants, conservancy or watering carts, road rollers, earth moving 
vehicles, ladder, scale weights, water treatment plants, sewerage 
treatment plants, etc.
o
Information with regard to the other equipments is being recorded 
in the Stock and Spares Register maintained in accordance with 
Form no. 59 of the Rules. 
o
The ULBs also maintain separate registers for movable assets.
·
Plant and machinery will include water and sewerage treatment plants.
·
The above registers record information with regard to cost, location and 
date of purchase of the various assets. The information contained in the 
register shall be verified with the documents available.
11.10.Vehicles
·
Vehicles include carts, hand rickshaws, animal drawn carts, three 
wheelers, four wheelers, and conservancy vehicles. Vehicles will be 
valued at cost less depreciation. 
11.11. Office and other equipment
·
This will include all office and other equipments e.g. computers, 
photocopies, telephone, fax, fans, electrical equipments, air 
conditioners, etc.
11.12.Furniture and fixtures
·
This will include tables, chairs, fittings, etc.
11.13.Livestock
·
Livestock will be valued at cost.
11.14.Intangible assets e.g. Software license fees
·
Intangible assets in ULBs will generally be in the nature of expenditure 
on software. The Executing agency will assess the expenditure made in 
development or purchase of the intangible asset in the last 5 years and 
capitalise it as fixed asset. In case the intangible asset has been provided 
free of cost by another Government department, it will not be shown in 
the balance sheet. Expenditure below Rs. 1,00,000/- will not be 
considered as an intangible asset for the purpose of this balance sheet. 
12.
DEPRECIATION
12.1. Depreciation will be provided on all assets except land, on a Straight Line 
Method
12.2. The rate of depreciation will be determined in the following order of 
preference:
12.2.1.
100% depreciation will be proportionately written off over the 
useful life of the depreciable assets. However, the last year's 
proportionate amount of depreciation should be reduced by Re.1/- 
which shall remain in the books of accounts as the 'residual value 'of 
the asset. 
Useful life of the asset will be estimated as follows:
·
Useful life for waterworks and sewage works has been provided in 
clause 208 of the W.B Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules,1999
§
For other assets it will be as per the Annexure 6 to the present 
st
Guidelines for preparation of Opening Balance Sheet as on 1  April, 
12.2.2.
Rates as mentioned in Schedule XIV of the Companies Act, 1956
12.3. Depreciation on intangible assets will be charged at 20% per annum. 
12.4. Depreciation shall be provided at full rates for assets, which are purchased/ 
constructed before October 1 of an Accounting Year. Depreciation shall be 
provided at half the rates for assets, which are purchased/ constructed on or 
after October 1 of an Accounting Year.
12.5. Purchase or construction of assets that have been done out of grants have 
been shown at gross value and the corresponding grant as a liability. An 
amount proportionate to the depreciation of the fixed asset should be 
deducted from the grant as well.
13.
CAPITAL WORKS IN PROGRESS
13.1. The information with regard to capital work in progress can be obtained from 
the Register of Works maintained in accordance with Form nos. 57 and 58 of 
the Rules.     
13.2. As per the procedures followed by the ULBs, once the details about the 
works are entered in the MB, the engineer prepares a bill and sends it to the 
accounts department, after necessary approvals, for payment. CWIP will be 
booked based on the gross amount of bill sent to the accounts department till 
st
31  March 2004. An effort will have to be made by the Executing agency to 
st
ensure that all bills approved till 31  March are taken into account. This may 
be ensured by checking prior dated bills till May 04.
13.3. Borrowing cost for CWIP will also be capitalized.
13.4. The assets, which have been commissioned and put to use, shall be taken out 
from the Register of Capital work in progress and booked under the 
respective heads of fixed assets.
13.5. The certificate that the asset has been put to use, shall be obtained from the 
Engineering department of the ULB.
13.6. The executing agency shall ensure that no maintenance expenses have been 
included in the Capital work in-progress.
14.
LONG TERM INVESTMENTS
14.1. Long term investments are the investments which are held by the ULBs for 
more than one year. 
14.2. At present, the ULB maintains the details of its investments in Form 88, 
Memorandum of Investments. 
14.3. The Executing agency will do a 100% physical verification of the original 
certificates and documents.
14.4. Cost of investments will include acquisition charges such as fees, brokerage 
and duties.
14.5. Long term investments will be valued at cost.
15.
CURRENT ASSETS
15.1. Current assets in the case of ULBs consist of the following
·
Cash in hand
·
Cash at bank 
·
Stores and spares  
·
Prepaid expenses
·
Arrears of property tax
·
Arrears of all other taxes, licenses and fees
·
Interest on investments
·
Interest on bank deposits
·
Interest on loans and advances
·
Recoverable deposits
·
Receivables against Deposit works
15.2. Cash in hand 
·
Generally there is no balance of cash as all are deposited into the bank. 
st
But if there is any balance as on 31  March 2004, the same would be 
reflected from the Cash Book.
15.3. Cash at bank 
·
Cash at bank consists of balance (a) with all banks and (b) at treasury. 
These two will be shown separately in the balance sheet.
·
The balance as per cashbook will appear in the balance sheet.  
·
The difference between the cashbook and the bank statements will be 
reconciled by ULBs.
·
A disclosure shall be made in the Notes on Accounts with regard to the 
following: 
The duration for which the bank reconciliation statements are pending; 
Items in bank reconciliation which are either pending for a long period 
of time i.e. exceeding six months or with high value i.e. above 
Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand Only).
15.4. Stores and spares  
·
Details with regard to stores and spares are maintained in Register of 
Stores and Spares which is in accordance with Form no. 59 of the Rules.
·
The Executing agency will prepare an updated list of items alongwith 
their quantity, value and date of purchase. In some cases, the Executing 
agency will need to segregate items, which are although a part of stores, 
but should not have been a part thereof e.g. vehicles. These will be 
classified in the appropriate account.
·
A list containing items, which have expired or are not in a condition to 
be used will be taken out from the list. The confirmation of the 
condemned or expired items is to be taken in the form of a certificate 
from the management.
·
Items which are in good condition will be then divided into two 
categories i.e. A and B 
o
Category A Items which have 80% of value and are 20% in number.
o
Category B Items which have 20% of value and are 80% in number.
The analysis will be done based on unit cost of the item. 
·
Items in category A will be physically verified to the extent of 100%. 
·
Stores and spares will be valued at cost. In determination of cost, FIFO 
method of costing will be used.
·
The cost of inventories should comprise all cost of purchase and cost of 
conversion incurred to bring the asset to its present location and 
condition. 
15.5. Prepaid expenses
·
Under the present set of Rules, no records have been prescribed for the 
prepaid expenses. Some ULBs make informal records such as hand 
registers and lists for the prepaid expenses. 
st
·
Expenses that have been paid in advance and relates to a period after 31  
March 2004 should be recognised as  prepaid expenses. 
15.6. Arrears of property tax  
·
Assessment department determines the total amount of property tax 
expected to be collected during the year. It then hands over the 
responsibility of collection to the Tax Collection department. The total 
amount of property tax in arrears is ascertainable from Form no. 12 
"Demand and Collection Register", Form no. 13 "Abstract of Demand 
and Collection Register" and Form no. 14 "Consolidated Abstract" of 
the Rules.
·
Ageing will be done for the arrears of property tax and will be shown in 
the Balance Sheet as Notes to Accounts. Ageing in the following slabs 
will be done i.e. below 3 years, 3-5 years, 5-10 years, 10-15 years and 
above 15 years 
·
Arrears of sick and closed industries will be provided for 100% as 
Provision
15.7. Arrears of all other taxes, licenses and fees 
·
This will include all other receivable other than property tax. This 
includes rent from municipal shops and markets, water charges and tax, 
advertisement tax, other fees, licenses, etc.  Water tax and rent from 
municipal properties will be accounted for on accrual basis. All other 
forms of income will be accounted on cash basis.
·
The water tax in the ULBs is imposed on a slab basis of property tax. 
The total amount of water tax in arrears can be ascertained from the 
Form no 12, 13 and 14 which are maintained separately for every tax 
source of revenue.
·
The amount of the "arrears of rent" is ascertainable from the Form 37 
"Demand and Collection Register of Rents", which is maintained 
according to the Rules. 
·
Provision will be made similar to that followed for property tax in case 
of water charge and rental income.
15.8. Interest on investments
·
Interest on investments will be accounted for on accrual basis. 
15.9. Interest on bank deposits
·
Interest on bank accounts and deposits will be accounted for on accrual 
basis.
15.10.Interest on loans and advances
·
Interest on loans and advances will be accounted for on accrual basis.
15.11.Recoverable deposits
·
The ULB may have kept deposits with third parties or with the 
Government or with any other person. Based on documentary evidence 
and if it is classified as a deposit, it will be shown as recoverable 
deposits and booked as current asset.
15.12.Receivables against Deposit works
·
If the amount expensed by ULB, is more than the amount received 
against the deposit works, it will be shown under this head. The actual 
value as per the books of account shall be taken.
16.
LOANS AND ADVANCES
16.1. Loans and advances can be in the nature of:
·
Advances to staff
·
Advance to contractors and suppliers
·
Material cost recoverable from contractors
16.2. Common guidelines
·
100% physical verification of documents will be done to ascertain the 
amount and name of party.
·
The closing balance of advance is ascertainable from the "Advance 
Ledger", which is maintained in accordance with Form no 67 of the 
Rules. The advance ledger is maintained separately for employees, 
contractors and suppliers.
16.3. Advances to staff
·
All unadjusted advances to staff e.g. house building advance, puja/ 
festival advance, will be accounted for on actual basis.
·
No provision shall be made to the unadjusted advances to staff. An 
annexure would be attached to the balance sheet showing the individual 
person-wise break-up of various advances given under different heads.
16.4. Advance to contractors and suppliers
·
Advance given to contractors and suppliers for goods and services will 
be accounted on actual basis.
16.5. Material cost recoverable from contractors
·
Sometimes the ULB may have provided materials to contractors for 
construction purposes. This would have been provided from the stores. 
The value of materials issued, if recoverable from the contractor, will 
be shown as cost recoverable.
17.
CURRENT INVESTMENTS
17.1. Current investments are investments that are readily realisable and not 
intended to be held for more than one year.
17.2. Presently the ULB maintains data related to investments in Form No. 88, 
Memorandum of Investments.
17.3. The Executing agency will do a 100% physical verification of the original 
certificates.
17.4. Valuation will be done at cost.
18.
SHORT TERM BORROWINGS
18.1. Short term borrowings are those which are due for not more than one year as 
at the date of balance sheet.
18.2. The amount of outstanding loans can be ascertained from the "Loan 
Register", maintained in accordance with the Form no. 72 of the Rules. Form 
no. 72 "Loan Register" does not differentiate between long-term borrowings 
and short-term borrowings. The short term borrowings shall be taken out 
from this register and would be recorded separately in the same format as 
prescribed under Form no 72.
18.3. Short term borrowing will be bifurcated as secured and unsecured, if any.
18.4. The Executing agency will ascertain the actual amount outstanding through 
confirmation of balance with the creditor and also by verifying through 
original documents
18.5. In case an amount had been received as loan, but has not still been waived off 
by the Government, the same will still figure in the balance sheet as a 
liability.
18.6. Interest accrued and due on these loans will be included here. Calculation of 
interest payable should be due on accrual basis
19.
CURRENT LIABILITIES
19.1. Current liabilities will constitute the following:
·
Bank overdraft
·
Security deposit/ Retention money/ Earnest money from contractors 
and suppliers
·
Deposit works
·
Other deposits
·
Advance collection of taxes and non-taxes
·
Income tax deducted payable
·
Sales tax deducted payable
·
Interest accrued but not due on loans
·
Unpaid salary and other employee related benefits
·
Unpaid electricity bills
·
Unpaid bills of suppliers and contractors
·
Payable to Government agencies
·
Recoveries from staff-payable
19.2. Bank overdraft
·
Bank overdraft will be verified with either the bank statement or a bank 
balance certificate.
19.3. Security deposit/ Retention money/ Earnest money from contractors and 
suppliers
·
Security deposit/ Retention money/ Earnest money is ascertainable 
from the "Deposit Ledger", which is maintained in accordance with the 
Form no 69 of the Rules.
·
This amount will be ascertained/ cross-checked from the original 
documents. 
·
Deposits received but not encashed will not be accounted for.
19.4. Deposit Works
·
Deposit works shall include the amount received from persons 
specifically for the construction of works. The deposit works are 
generally received from Zilla Parishads, MPLADS, MLA funds 
(BEUP), for specific works. The unutilised or the balance amount of 
these grants will be shown under this head. 
·
If the amount is received for the construction of a specific asset for 
ULB, then the CWIP/ Asset would be shown in the books of account of 
ULB.