 
400 
CHAPTER IV 
AUDIT ON THE ACCOUNTS OF PANCHAYAT UNION COUNCILS  
GENERAL FUNDS  
1. 
Authority for audit: -  The audit on the accounts of the Panchayat Union Councils was entrusted to this 
Department, in G.O.Ms.No.I722, Local Administration, dated 15th October 1960 and in G.O. Ms. No.265 / RD/ 21-
12-1999. 
 
(As per Act No.21 of The Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994) 
 
2. 
Constitution of Panchayat Unions:- Panchayat Unions have been constituted under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats 
Act, 1958 and 1994 for the purpose of carrying out the measures relating to Public Utility calculated to promote the 
safety, comfort or convenience of the rural folk and for carrying out schemes relating to National Extension Service 
scheme of Community Developments in the capacity of Government. They have taken the place of former District 
Boards.  
 
Audit of General Fund Accounts : The constitution of Panchayat Union is governed by the Tamil Nadu 
Panchayats Act, 1994. The Act envisages that the governing body of the Panchayat Union is the Panchayat Union 
Council. The aims and objections of the Panchayat Union have been enumerated in the preamble to the Tamil 
Nadu Panchayats Act. 1994. The day to day administration is carried out by the Commissioner who is responsible 
for the statutory functions specified in  section 85 of the Act and for the production of Accounts Registers and 
records for audit.  
3. 
Functions of Panchayat Unions:-  The functions allotted to the Panchayat Unions can be classified as mandatory, 
discretionary or agency.  
 
i. 
Mandatory functions are those which are carried out as per the provisions of the Act: It is the duty of 
the Panchayat Union to make reasonable provision and constitute a first charge on the resources placed at 
the disposal of the Panchayat Union viz., Local Health, Welfare, Service, Local Communication.  
 
ii. 
Discretionary functions are those in which the State Government have authorised the Panchayat Union 
administration to perform.  
 
iii. 
Agency functions relate to matters in respect of which the Panchayat Union performs functions entrusted by 
the Government.  
 
As per Section 257 of Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act 1994. Schedule – IV. The Power, authority and responsibilities of 
Panchayat union are: 
 
1. 
Poverty alleviation programmes 
 
2. 
Drinking water 
 
3. 
Roads, Culverts, Bridges, Waterways and other means of communication. 
 
4. 
Khadhi, Village and Cottage Industries 
 
5. 
Technical Training and Vocational Education 
 
6. 
Libraries 
 
7. 
Rural electrification including distribution of Electricity 
 
8. 
Non conventional energy sources. 
 
(G.O. Ms. No.75 Rural Development (C1) Department Date 14-3-97) 
4. 
The resources for carrying out the various functions of the Panchayat union are obtained by way of Local 
Taxation, Government grants, loans, contributions and income derived from markets, etc. The funds of the 
Panchayat Unions are as follows:-  
 
