 
376 
6. 
Repairs to equipments Tools and Plant.  
7.     Other miscellaneous items 
Note:  i) Sanitary wares and stoneware pipes should be purchased only from Tamil Nadu Ceramics Ltd.,  
(Govt. Lr. No. 1 285     Industries     dated 30th October 1984)  
ii)  
Supply of copies of Act which are relevant to Panchayat Administration.  
 
(G.O.Ms.No.2722 Local Administration     dated 20th. July 1937 and  
 
No.4353    Local Administration   dated 2nd November 1938)  
iii)   Expenditure on survey of streets.  
 
(G.O.Ms.No.1488     Local Administration     dated 3rd July 1944)  
iv) 
Purchase of Bicycles for office use. 
 
The vouchers would have been preliminarily checked in the audit office every month and defects noticed pointed 
out in the monthly audit notes and the points to be seen in local audit such as verification of Tender files, stock account 
etc., would have been marked on the vouchers. These should be examined in addition to the further checks that may be 
necessary. The main checks that should be exercised are the following:  
i. 
that the expenditure is a proper charge on the panchayat funds and covered by necessary budget provision. 
ii. 
that necessary sanction to the expenditure required by rules has been obtained.  
iii. 
that it has been incurred by the Officer competent to incur it.  
iv. 
that competitive tenders or quotations have been. invited as required by the rules and the lowest tender or 
quotation only has been accepted.  
v. 
that. an agreement has been obtained from the accepted tenderer and payments are made only at the accepted 
rates;  
vi. 
that the actual receipt of the articles purchased has been certified‘ to by the executive authority.  
 
The sanction of the District Town Panchayat Officer has been obtained for dispensing with the tenders. The non-
observance of any of the provisions of tender rules should be got condoned by District Town Panchayat Officer.  
 
That the lowest tender has been accepted or the reasons for non-acceptance of the lowest tender specifically 
recorded.  
 
The practice of specifying the ―particular make‖ in the tender notice should be avoided.  
 
While calling for tenders the tenderers should be required to enclose a Sales Tax declaration form with reference to 
G.O.Ms.No.24l6, Revenue, dated 10th June 1974.  
 
The tender rates should be examined to ascertain whether they do not vary abnormally with the present market 
rates. The rates for items like pipes the rates in the neighboring panchayat may also be compared by the auditor.  
 
The Rubbish carts should be purchased after inviting tenders only after ascertaining the non-availability of such 
carts in Government sponsored industrial units, Tansi and Units run by Panchayat Union Councils.  
 
All purchases should be made only from the nearest Government or Co-operative institutions like State Seed 
Farms, Supermarkets, Khadi and Village Industries Sales Depots or Panchayat Union depots or the whole-sale dealers 
like Mettur chemicals limited.  
 
(D.R.D. circular RC.No.150097179/Accts VIII-A,    dated 28th December 1979)  
