 
399 
 
Where the lease period exceeds one year the lease amount may be permitted to be paid in not more than two 
installments for every year of lease, the last  installment is being payable one year before the period of expiry of the 
lease period or in the beginning of the lease period whichever is earlier. 
 
That the Bank Guarantee should be kept alive till the realisation of entire dues from the lessees. 
 
That the lease cum deed is executed incorporating all conditions. 
 
(Director of Town Panchayats Circular Roc. 14956/06 dt:27-09-2006) 
65.  BUDGET:  The scrutiny of the expenditure for the year under several heads should be compared with the provision 
in the budget. Sanction of the Town Panchayat and of the District Collector for reappropriation of amounts 
exceeding Rs.100 in each case and that of the panchayat in ‗other cases should be called for and verified. If such a 
transfer of allotment is required after the close of the year to which the transaction relates the sanction of the 
District Collector should be called for irrespective of the amount involved. Expenditure in excess of the budget 
provision without reappropriation of funds under competent sanction should also be listed out for inclusion in the 
report in case where the excess exceeds Rs.25/-. 
Note: Each case of excess expenditure which does not exceed 5 per cent of the provision in the Budget estimate, should 
be got ratified by the District Collector concerned after obtaining the sanction of the concerned Town Panchayat and 
each case of excess expenditure which exceeds 5 per cent of the provision in the Budget Estimate should be got 
approved by the District Collector.  
(G.O. Ms. No. 1487,   Rural Development and Local Administration,   dated 21st September 1979)  
Audit Report 
 
On the conclusion of audit  the annual audit report with important irregularities should be prepared and forwarded to 
the Executive Authority along with a copy of the audited annual account of receipts and charges duly signed by the 
Head of the audit party or by the persons who reviewed the audit. Minor irregularities should be included in the 
annual audit notes and forwarded to the Executive Authority for return within 2 months with replies. While noting the 
name of the Executive Officer in the Audit report the names  of the following persons and their period of service 
may also be incorporated: 
 
1. 
Name of Asst Engineer 
 
2. 
Name of Asst Executive Engineer 
 
3. 
Name of  Head Clerk 
 
4. 
Name of  Junior Assistant 
(H.O. Circular Roc. No. T.Pt.1/40961 / 2001   /   dt:18-09-2001) 
Note : Model Audit report  commnicated  by the director of Local Fund  Audit  S shoulld be followed. 
 
On receipt of a copy of the replies and resolution of the Panchayat duly reviewed by the Assistant Director of Town 
Panchayat, further remarks should be issued in the usual manner.  
Ten percent of the Town Panchayat Audit Report may be marked to Accountant General Chennai on cyclic basis… 
Address: 
The Senior Deputy Accountant General, Local Body Institutions Audit and Accounts, Leka Parisha Bhavan, 361, Anna 
Salai – Chennai 600 008., (H.O. Cir.No.Roc.29/2006  /   communicated in letter Roc. No.25322 / T.Pt.3 / 2006 /   14-06-
2006) 
66.  AUDIT BY ACCOUNTANT GENERAL: 
 
The Government have examined the request of the Principal Accountant General (Audit) Tamil Nadu and permit  to 
conduct audit in respect of Town Panchayats under Section 14(2) of the comptroller and Auditor General‘s (DPC) Act 
1971, wherever the Town Panchayats receives grants from the consolidated Fund of the State exceeds Rs.1 Crore in a 
particular financial year. 
(G.O. Ms. No.208    MAWS (TPI) Dept  dt: 09-12-2003) 
