=== PAGE 44 ===
44       Vision Tamil Nadu 2023: Strategic Plan for Infrastructure Development in Tamil Nadu
3.3  Strategic initiative 2: 
Making SMEs vibrant
SMEs play a vital role in any economy, particularly 
the developing economies where disparities are 
pervasive. Tamil Nadu has a strong Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME) base with nearly 7 lakh 
registered units, the highest for any state in India. 
The investment in SMEs is estimated at Rs. 32,000 
crore providing employment to more than 50 lakh 
people which is also the highest for any state in 
India. A number of natural SME clusters have formed 
across the state supporting the industrial and 
service sectors. Tamil Nadu has a solid base of SMEs 
which can serve as a launching pad for their growth.
As the economy moves into a higher growth 
trajectory, it is imperative for the SMEs also to adapt 
themselves to provide the necessary products and 
services. SMEs have a further challenge of moving up 
the manufacturing value chain in tandem with the 
large scale industries which will henceforth compete 
on innovation and High value manufacturing. 
Traditionally, SMEs have thrived on fiscal and other 
support from the government. However, in order to 
make them sustainable in the long run, their inherent 
competitiveness has to be enhanced. Further, the 
threat of loss of subsidies and support have inhibited 
small enterprises from growing out of their ‘Small 
Scale’ status, even though many of them have the 
capabilities and the wherewithal to develop into 
medium and large sized organisations. An appropriate 
incentivisation policy is required to encourage the 
evolution of small enterprises to a larger scale. 
Typically, the SME sector in developing economies 
is confronted with a wide range of structural issues 
and challenges, such as limited access to finance, 
technology and markets. Though states like Tamil 
Nadu have in the recent past seen significant 
growth in entrepreneurial spirit and management 
skills, yet the operations and growth of SME entities 
remain significantly restricted due to the impact 
of numerous constraints prevalent in the sector. 
The impact of these constraints is compounded by 
lack of information, issues in compliance to quality 
standards and certification and the absence of a 
conducive business environment. In addition, the 
increasing usage of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) as well as the outsourcing and 
networking strategies adopted by large enterprises 
and multinational corporations (MNCs) require 
SMEs to undertake proactive measures to ensure 
their business sustainability. 
While 
the 
operating 
environment 
for 
SMEs 
continues to remain challenging, SMEs by character 
are expected to be more agile and adaptable to 
changes in the business environment compared 
to 
large 
organisations. 
Greater 
competition, 
rapid technological advances, more demanding 
market requirements, and constant changes in 
consumer demands require SMEs to be innovative 
and creative in order to face the challenges of the 
global market. Therefore, there is a need to create 
and promote a conducive business environment for 
SME development where both Government and the 
private sector assume synergistic and complementary 
roles to help SMEs emerge as viable and high 
potential businesses. In such complementary and 
collaborative arrangements, the Government needs 
to assume the role of a facilitator to SMEs which 
themselves have the drive, spirit and capabilities to 
be the engines of growth. Appropriate and effective 
facilitation of SMEs in an economy can be achieved 
through structured, organised and targeted action 
plans and development programmes for SMEs.
The pillars of SME development are:
♦	
Access to finance
♦	
Conducive regulatory and policy environment
♦	
Access to technology 
♦	
Market access 
♦	
Infrastructure availability
The above issues will be addressed through a 
combination of policy measures, skill development 
and infrastructure facilities. Measures such as cluster 
development will be adopted in implementing 
focused initiatives to make SMEs competitive. The 
cluster development initiative will include both 
ancillary clusters based on large mother industries 
and stand alone clusters. Some of the initiatives that 
will help in improving the competitiveness of the 
SMEs are:
1.	 Access to finance
Inability to access finance at competitive interest 
rates or in a timely manner has been an important 

=== PAGE 45 ===
 Strategic Plan for Infrastructure Development in Tamil Nadu :Vision Tamil Nadu 2023       45
factor hindering the growth and sustainability 
of SMEs. Part of the reason is the inability of a 
typical SME unit’s management to assess the fund 
requirements and/or to manage funds judiciously. 
Skill development initiatives targeted at improving 
the managerial capabilities of entrepreneurs is 
an important intervention that will help SMEs 
in understanding the importance of financial 
management. The need for and advantage of 
maintaining proper accounting records and 
financial information for a commercial business 
shall be emphasized as part of skill building of 
SME employees. Capacity building is also required 
for lending institutions, particularly, state level 
financial institutions and co-operative banks that 
are the major source of funds for SMEs. Capabilities 
to deal with innovative financing products such as 
credit guarantees, operating lease structures, seed 
funding and 